.\"Copyright (c) 2024, Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo <DtxdF@disroot.org>
.\"All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\"* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
.\"  list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\"* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
.\"  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
.\"  and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"* Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
.\"  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"  this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\"THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\"AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\"DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\"FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\"SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\"CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\"OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\"OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd April 15, 2024
.Dt APPJAIL-EPHEMERAL 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm appjail-ephemeral
.Nd cattle, pets and jails
.Sh DESCRIPTION
AppJail has a notion of treating jails like
.Sy cattle Ns , so many of the features are designed with that in mind. Although this is a
priority, FreeBSD users are commonly tied to the notion of treating jails like
.Sy pets Ns , so the result is that AppJail supports both approaches for different
users.
.Pp
The
.Dq cattle vs. pets
approach is not a formal standard, it's just a convention for how you should treat
your servers, which in this case, servers means jails. The article that clearly
explains this approach is the following:
.Pp
.Lk https://cloudscaling.com/blog/cloud-computing/the-history-of-pets-vs-cattle/ "The History of Pets vs Cattle and How to Use the Analogy Properly"
.Pp
In this document I will not explain which approach is best for you as it depends
entirely on your needs and how you work, instead I will describe how we can use
AppJail following a concept known as
.Dq The Ephemeral Concept
that I am applying, practically since AppJail was born. You should know a lot about
FreeBSD, AppJail, and the application you're running, so use this approach responsibly.
.Sh THE EPHEMERAL CONCEPT
The ephemeral concept means that you should treat your jails as ephemeral as possible.
This doesn't mean that your jails should disappear after rebooting the system or stopping
the jail; What this means is that since you have clearly separated the data that should
persist after the jail is created again, from the data that should not persist.
.Pp
What data is ephemeral and what is not? The simplest examples of ephemeral data are binaries
and all the elements that make up the jail that are restored after recreating the jail. Data
that should not be destroyed is application data, e.g. If we have a DBMS running inside the
jail, we should not destroy its database. Configuration files
.Pq and similar
may be considered non-ephemeral, but in most cases the main difference compared to application
data is how you reinstall them; in the case of configuration files
.Pq and similar
they can be copied every time the jail is recreated, but it must happen before the jail, or
service running inside the jail, is started, and the application data is probably achieved
by mounting it inside the jail using a tool like
.Xr mount_nullfs 8 "."
.Sh IMPLEMENTING THE EPHEMERAL CONCEPT
The simplest way to explain how we can use the ephemeral concept in a jail created
by Appjail is top-down instead of bottom-up, or in other words, let's create a jail
with a directory mounted on the data directory that is inside the jail.
.Pp
.Bd -literal -compact -offset Ds
.No # Nm mkdir -p .volumes/wwwdir
.No # Nm appjail makejail Fl j Ar darkhttpd Fl f Ar gh+AppJail-makejails/darkhttpd No \e
.No "    " Ns Fl o Cm virtualnet Ns = Ns Qo Ar ":<random> default" Qc No \e
.No "    " Ns Fl o Cm nat No \e
.No "    " Ns Fl o Cm fstab Ns = Ns Qo Ar "$PWD/.volumes/wwwdir" /usr/local/www/darkhttpd Qc
\&.\&.\&.
.No # Nm appjail fstab Cm jail Ar darkhttpd
NRO  ENABLED  NAME  DEVICE                       MOUNTPOINT                TYPE    OPTIONS  DUMP  PASS
0    1        -     /home/dtxdf/.volumes/wwwdir  /usr/local/www/darkhttpd  nullfs  rw       0     0
.No # Nm echo Qo Ar <h1>Hello!</h1> Qc > Pa .volumes/wwwdir/index.html
.No # Nm appjail jail Cm list Fl j Ar darkhttpd
STATUS  NAME       TYPE  VERSION       PORTS  NETWORK_IP4
UP      darkhttpd  thin  13.3-RELEASE  -      10.0.0.5
.No # Nm curl Ar http://10.0.0.5
<h1>Hello!</h1>
.Ed
.Pp
The result of this session is self-explanatory: we have created a jail with a static
web server installed and mounted a directory from the host to the directory that the
web server uses. The directory, since it is located on the host, can be used to write
files, so that's what we did: we wrote a little HTML code to display
.Em Hello!
to clients connecting to the web server. We did what the ephemeral concept explains:
we separated the data that should persist from the data that should not. Let's destroy
the jail to recreate it again:
.Pp
.Bd -literal -compact -offset Ds
.No # Nm appjail makejail Fl j Ar darkhttpd Fl f Ar gh+AppJail-makejails/darkhttpd No \e
.No "    " Ns Fl o Cm virtualnet Ns = Ns Qo Ar ":<random> default" Qc No \e
.No "    " Ns Fl o Cm nat No \e
.No "    " Ns Fl o Cm fstab Ns = Ns Qo Ar "$PWD/.volumes/wwwdir" /usr/local/www/darkhttpd Qc
\&.\&.\&.
.No # Nm appjail fstab Cm jail Ar darkhttpd
NRO  ENABLED  NAME  DEVICE                       MOUNTPOINT                TYPE    OPTIONS  DUMP  PASS
0    1        -     /home/dtxdf/.volumes/wwwdir  /usr/local/www/darkhttpd  nullfs  rw       0     0
.No # Nm appjail jail Cm list Fl j Ar darkhttpd
STATUS  NAME       TYPE  VERSION       PORTS  NETWORK_IP4
UP      darkhttpd  thin  13.3-RELEASE  -      10.0.0.5
.No # Nm curl Ar http://10.0.0.5
<h1>Hello!</h1>
.Ed
.Pp
Amazing! We have successfully implemented the ephemeral concept. So easy, but this
doesn't show some problems that we must face in real life, specifically two problems:
.Sy filesystem permissions
and
.Sy mounting a directory from the host to a directory containing data "."
Those issues may or may not affect the application inside the jail. In the case of the
example above, it is not affected unless the files need to be written with the same
UID and GID as the running process, but this is not the case.
.Ss Filesystem Permissions
The application running inside the jail assumes it can write its data just fine
and the process is probably running using a dedicated user, so we shouldn't mount
a directory from the host to the jail without this in mind. We need to know the UID,
GID, file mode and mount point in advance. This is very easy to know: just create a
jail and install the application inside it, and proceed to inquire the information we
need. At this point it is not necessary to configure a directory and we should not do
it since we do not have the necessary information to do it correctly. Let's create a
jail to clarify:
.Pp
.Bd -literal -compact -offset Ds
.No # Nm appjail makejail Fl j Ar rustypaste Fl f Ar gh+AppJail-makejails/rustypaste No \e
.No "    " Ns Fl o Cm virtualnet Ns = Ns Qo Ar ":<random> default" Qc No \e
.No "    " Ns Fl o Cm nat
.No # Nm appjail cmd Cm jexec Ar rustypaste Cm ls Fl ld Ar /var/db/rustypaste
drwxr-xr-x  5 rustypaste  rustypaste  512 Apr 15 05:37 /var/db/rustypaste
.No # Nm appjail cmd Cm jexec Ar rustypaste Cm pw usershow Ar rustypaste
rustypaste:*:498:498::0:0:Minimal file upload/pastebin service:/nonexistent:/usr/sbin/nologin
.No # Nm appjail cmd Cm jexec Ar rustypaste Cm pw groupshow Ar rustypaste
rustypaste:*:498:
.Ed
.Pp
Of course, I'm cheating since I know in advance which directory the above application uses,
but for applications you don't know very well I recommend that you read their documentation
and the
.Xr rc 8
script, if the application comes with one.
.Pp
As a last note: most services start with an empty directory and put files and more
directories into it; What you need to know is if that directory is empty or has some
files. This is very important because the service may need such files and if you simply
mount a directory from the host to the jail, it will overlap and the service will not
see those files. See
.Sx Mounting a Directory from the Host to a Directory Containing Data
to see how to fix this problem.
.Pp
Now that we have enough information, let's create the directory but with the properties that the application needs:
.Pp
.Bd -literal -compact -offset Ds
.No # Nm mkdir -p .volumes/db
.No # Nm chmod 755 .volumes/db
.No # Nm chown -f 498:498 .volumes/db
.Ed
.Pp
The jail can be created again using the same command above but with the
.Cm fstab
option pointing to the directory we have recently created.
.Pp
.Bd -literal -compact -offset Ds
.No # Nm appjail makejail Fl j Ar rustypaste Fl f Ar gh+AppJail-makejails/rustypaste No \e
.No "    " Ns Fl o Cm virtualnet Ns = Ns Qo Ar ":<random> default" Qc No \e
.No "    " Ns Fl o Cm nat No \e
.No "    " Ns Fl o Cm fstab Ns = Ns Qo Ar $PWD/.volumes/db /var/db/rustypaste Qc
.No # Nm appjail jail Cm list Fl j Ar rustypaste
STATUS  NAME        TYPE  VERSION       PORTS  NETWORK_IP4
UP      rustypaste  thin  13.3-RELEASE  -      10.0.0.7
.No # Nm appjail cmd Cm jexec Ar rustypaste Cm cat Ar /var/log/rustypaste.log
2024-04-15T10:06:16.650846Z  INFO rustypaste: Server is running at 0.0.0.0:8000
2024-04-15T10:06:16.650864Z  INFO actix_server::builder: starting 4 workers
2024-04-15T10:06:16.650870Z  INFO actix_server::server: Actix runtime found; starting in Actix runtime
.No # Nm echo Qo Ar Hello! Qc | Nm rpaste Fl s Ar http://10.0.0.7:8000 Fl
http://10.0.0.7:8000/able-locust.txt
.No # Nm curl Ar http://10.0.0.7:8000/able-locust.txt
Hello!
.Ed
.Pp
If we create the jail again using exactly the same command above, we can use the
application as if the jail destruction had not occurred.
.Pp
.Bd -literal -compact -offset Ds
.No # Nm appjail makejail Fl j Ar rustypaste Fl f Ar gh+AppJail-makejails/rustypaste No \e
.No "    " Ns Fl o Cm virtualnet Ns = Ns Qo Ar ":<random> default" Qc No \e
.No "    " Ns Fl o Cm nat No \e
.No "    " Ns Fl o Cm fstab Ns = Ns Qo Ar $PWD/.volumes/db /var/db/rustypaste Qc
.No # Nm curl Ar http://10.0.0.7:8000/able-locust.txt
Hello!
.Ed
.Ss Mounting a Directory from the Host to a Directory Containing Data
.Xr mount_nullfs 8 ","
the preferred tool for mounting files or directories from the host to the jail, is very useful, but it gives us a problem if we use it incorrectly: suppose we have two directories,
.Pa A/
and
.Pa B/ Ns ,
that have a file in each one,
.Pa A/foo.txt
and
.Pa B/bar.txt Ns ,
and we want to mount
.Pa B/
to
.Pa A/ Ns ,
so we run
.Dq mount_nullfs B/ A/
and run
.Dq ls A/
to see that we now have only
.Pa A/bar.txt Ns "."
There is nothing wrong with
.Xr mount_nullfs 8 ","
but we must keep this in mind to use it correctly.
.Pp
This problem means that we need to move the files from the jail to the host and
mount the directory from the host to the jail as we normally do. This, of course,
must be achieved before the service is started, which in real life means that it
must be achieved before the jail is started, since it is common for the service
to start just a few seconds after starting the jail.
.Pp
Fortunately for you, the user, AppJail can easily do the above using the
.Sy <pseudofs>
pseudo-filesystem. See
.Xr appjail-fstab 1
for more details.
.Pp
.Bd -literal -compact -offset Ds
.No # Nm appjail makejail Fl j Ar mariadb Fl f Ar gh+AppJail-makejails/mariadb No \e
.No "    " Ns Fl o Cm virtualnet Ns = Ns Qo Ar :<random> address:10.0.0.70 default Qc \e
.No "    " Ns Fl o Cm nat No Fl - No \e
.No "        " Ns Fl -mariadb_user Qo Ar wpuser Qc \e
.No "        " Ns Fl -mariadb_password Qo Ar 123 Qc \e
.No "        " Ns Fl -mariadb_database Qo Ar wordpress Qc \e
.No "        " Ns Fl -mariadb_root_password Qo 321 Qc
.No # Nm appjail jail Cm list Fl j Ar mariadb
STATUS  NAME     TYPE  VERSION       PORTS  NETWORK_IP4
UP      mariadb  thin  13.3-RELEASE  -      10.0.0.70
.No # Nm appjail makejail Fl j Ar wordpress Fl f Ar gh+AppJail-makejails/wordpress No \e
.No "    " Ns Fl o Cm virtualnet Ns = Ns Qo Ar :<random> default Qc \e
.No "    " Ns Fl o Cm nat No Fl - No \e
.No "        " Ns Fl -wp_db_name Qo Ar wordpress Qc \e
.No "        " Ns Fl -wp_db_user Qo Ar wpuser Qc \e
.No "        " Ns Fl -wp_db_password Qo Ar 123 Qc \e
.No "        " Ns Fl -wp_db_host Qo Ar 10.0.0.70 Qc
.No # Nm appjail cmd Cm jexec Ar wordpress Cm ls Ar /usr/local/www/apache24/data/wp-content
index.php       plugins         themes
.No # Nm mkdir Fl p Ar .volumes/wp-content
.No # Nm chown Ar www:www Ar .volumes/wp-content
.No # Nm appjail makejail Fl j Ar mariadb Fl f Ar gh+AppJail-makejails/mariadb No \e
.No "    " Ns Fl o Cm virtualnet Ns = Ns Qo Ar :<random> address:10.0.0.70 default Qc \e
.No "    " Ns Fl o Cm nat No \e
.No "    " Ns Fl o Cm fstab Ns = Ns Qo Ar $PWD/.volumes/wp-content /usr/local/www/apache24/data/wp-content <pseudofs> Qc Fl - No \e
.No "        " Ns Fl -mariadb_user Qo Ar wpuser Qc \e
.No "        " Ns Fl -mariadb_password Qo Ar 123 Qc \e
.No "        " Ns Fl -mariadb_database Qo Ar wordpress Qc \e
.No "        " Ns Fl -mariadb_root_password Qo Ar 321 Qc
\&.\&.\&.
[00:00:50] [ debug ] [wordpress] Compiling fstab file ...
[00:00:51] [ debug ] [wordpress] Compiling fstab #0: /home/dtxdf/.volumes/wp-content /usr/local/www/apache24/data/wp-content <pseudofs> rw 0 0
[00:00:51] [ debug ] [wordpress] Moving /usr/local/appjail/jails/wordpress/jail//usr/local/www/apache24/data/wp-content/plugins/hello.php -> /home/dtxdf/.volumes/wp-content/plugins/hello.php ...
[00:00:51] [ debug ] [wordpress] Moving /usr/local/appjail/jails/wordpress/jail//usr/local/www/apache24/data/wp-content/plugins/index.php -> /home/dtxdf/.volumes/wp-content/plugins/index.php ...
[00:00:51] [ debug ] [wordpress] Moving /usr/local/appjail/jails/wordpress/jail//usr/local/www/apache24/data/wp-content/plugins/akismet/readme.txt -> /home/dtxdf/.volumes/wp-content/plugins/akismet/readme.txt ...
[00:00:51] [ debug ] [wordpress] Moving /usr/local/appjail/jails/wordpress/jail//usr/local/www/apache24/data/wp-content/plugins/akismet/class.akismet-rest-api.php -> /home/dtxdf/.volumes/wp-content/plugins/akismet/class.akismet-rest-api.php ...
[00:00:51] [ debug ] [wordpress] Moving /usr/local/appjail/jails/wordpress/jail//usr/local/www/apache24/data/wp-content/plugins/akismet/LICENSE.txt -> /home/dtxdf/.volumes/wp-content/plugins/akismet/LICENSE.txt ...
[00:00:51] [ debug ] [wordpress] Moving /usr/local/appjail/jails/wordpress/jail//usr/local/www/apache24/data/wp-content/plugins/akismet/index.php -> /home/dtxdf/.volumes/wp-content/plugins/akismet/index.php ...
[00:00:51] [ debug ] [wordpress] Moving /usr/local/appjail/jails/wordpress/jail//usr/local/www/apache24/data/wp-content/plugins/akismet/wrapper.php -> /home/dtxdf/.volumes/wp-content/plugins/akismet/wrapper.php ...
[00:00:51] [ debug ] [wordpress] Moving /usr/local/appjail/jails/wordpress/jail//usr/local/www/apache24/data/wp-content/plugins/akismet/changelog.txt -> /home/dtxdf/.volumes/wp-content/plugins/akismet/changelog.txt ...
[00:00:51] [ debug ] [wordpress] Moving /usr/local/appjail/jails/wordpress/jail//usr/local/www/apache24/data/wp-content/plugins/akismet/_inc/akismet.js -> /home/dtxdf/.volumes/wp-content/plugins/akismet/_inc/akismet.js ...
[00:00:51] [ debug ] [wordpress] Moving /usr/local/appjail/jails/wordpress/jail//usr/local/www/apache24/data/wp-content/plugins/akismet/_inc/akismet-admin.js -> /home/dtxdf/.volumes/wp-content/plugins/akismet/_inc/akismet-admin.js ..
--snip--
.No # Nm appjail fstab Cm jail Ar wordpress
NRO  ENABLED  NAME  DEVICE                           MOUNTPOINT                               TYPE        OPTIONS  DUMP  PASS
0    1        -     /home/dtxdf/.volumes/wp-content  /usr/local/www/apache24/data/wp-content  <pseudofs>  rw       0     0
.No # Nm appjail fstab Cm jail Ar wordpress Cm mounted
/usr/local/appjail/releases/amd64/13.3-RELEASE/default/release -> /usr/local/appjail/jails/wordpress/jail/.appjail
/home/dtxdf/.volumes/wp-content -> /usr/local/appjail/jails/wordpress/jail/usr/local/www/apache24/data/wp-content
devfs -> /usr/local/appjail/jails/wordpress/jail/dev
.Ed
.Pp
Fortunately, most programs are flexible enough to use a custom directory, which
in most cases is initially empty or otherwise only has a few files.
.Sh VOLUMES
A volume, at least in AppJail, is a mechanism for keeping data generated by applications
inside the jail. A volume is not linked to a specific filesystem, but the preferred one
is
.Xr nullfs 5 "."
However, changing the file mode, UID and GID, and remembering the mount point every
time we need to implement the ephemeral concept is repetitive. A script can be created,
but if you plan to deploy your application, it is probably best to have a formal way
to accomplish such a task.
.Pp
The formal way is known as
.Xr appjail-volume 1 ","
the utility for creating volumes,
although it works in conjunction with
.Xr appjail-fstab 1 "."
Typically, these specifications are not created by the end user, but by the developer
who wrote the Makejail. It is common to use images to distribute volume specifications
since they are preserved in this format.
.Pp
.Bd -literal -compact -offset Ds
.No # Nm mkdir Fl p Ar .volumes/db
.No # Nm appjail makejail Fl j Ar rustypaste Fl f Ar gh+AppJail-makejails/rustypaste No \e
.No "    " Ns Fl o Cm virtualnet Ns = Ns Qo Ar ":<random> default" Qc No \e
.No "    " Ns Fl o Cm nat No \e
.No "    " Ns Fl o Cm fstab Ns = Ns Qo Ar $PWD/.volumes/db rustypaste-db <volumefs> Qc
.No # Nm appjail fstab Cm jail Ar rustypaste
NRO  ENABLED  NAME  DEVICE            MOUNTPOINT     TYPE        OPTIONS  DUMP  PASS
0    1        -     /tmp/.volumes/db  rustypaste-db  <volumefs>  rw       0     0
.No # Nm appjail fstab Cm jail Ar rustypaste Cm mounted
/usr/local/appjail/releases/amd64/13.3-RELEASE/default/release -> /usr/local/appjail/jails/rustypaste/jail/.appjail
/tmp/.volumes/db -> /usr/local/appjail/jails/rustypaste/jail/var/db/rustypaste
devfs -> /usr/local/appjail/jails/rustypaste/jail/dev
.No # Nm appjail volume Cm list Ar rustypaste
NAME           MOUNTPOINT          TYPE        UID  GID  PERM
rustypaste-db  /var/db/rustypaste  <pseudofs>  498  498  -
.No # Nm ls Fl ld Ar .volumes/db
drwxr-xr-x  5 498 498 512 Apr 16 03:09 .volumes/db
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Sy <volumefs>
pseudo-filesystem does all the work for the end user. The user only needs to create
a directory, but the file mode, UID, and GID are completely set by
.Xr appjail-fstab 1
depending on the entries specified by
.Xr appjail-volume 1 "."
The best part is that it is irrelevant to know where to mount the directory, the
user only needs to know the volume name.
.Sh UPDATE / UPGRADE
This is the part where we see a strong difference between the
.Dq cattle vs. pets
debate. FreeBSD users, as mentioned, treat their jails like a cute pet, or in other
words, they expect to run
.Xr freebsd-update 8
on a jail, which is not possible for thin jails, but is possible for thick jails.
For thin jails,
.Xr freebsd-update 8
runs on the release
.Po or the base directory as known on some websites or books Pc Ns ;
Everything is fine, if you only need to update, the problem is when you want to upgrade.
.Pp
The upgrade process is a bit more complicated than a simple update because you are
effectively applying changes to a modified system that can cause conflicts. Thin
jails further complicate this process as they are tied to the release directory
.Po or base directory Pc Ns ,
so it is necessary to create a new jail with the installed application and the data
it uses. The newly created thin jail should of course use a release with the new FreeBSD
version. Even if you use a thick jail, you have to worry about other things, such as storage
.Pq in the modern era, it may not be a problem
and time and resources
.Po bandwidth, storage, CPU consumption, etc. Pc Ns ,
since that you need to do the upgrade process for each jail. Clearly, treating jails
like a pet is not feasible in these cases.
.Pp
How can we use the ephemeral concept to upgrade jails? Suppose we have a jail using
a release with FreeBSD 13.3-RELEASE and we want to upgrade it to 14.0-RELEASE, since
we follow the ephemeral concept, our data will persist even if we destroy and create
the jail again, so let's do it, create the jail again but using a release with 14.0-RELEASE.
.Pp
.Bd -literal -compact -offset Ds
.No # Nm cat No << Sy EOF No > Pa Makejail
OPTION start
OPTION overwrite=force
OPTION virtualnet=:<random> default
OPTION nat
OPTION pkg=darkhttpd
OPTION fstab=$PWD/.volumes/wwwdir /usr/local/www/darkhttpd

SERVICE darkhttpd oneenable
SERVICE darkhttpd start
.Sy EOF
.No # Nm appjail fetch Cm list No | Nm grep Fl Ee No \&' Ns Ar ^ARCH Ns \&' Fl e No \&' Ns Ar [0-9]+\.[0-9]+\-RELEASE Ns \&'
ARCH   VERSION       NAME
amd64  14.0-RELEASE  default
amd64  13.3-RELEASE  default
.No # Nm appjail makejail Fl j Ar darkhttpd Fl o Cm osversion Ns = Ns Ar 13.3-RELEASE
\&.\&.\&.
.No # Nm appjail jail Cm list Fl j Ar darkhttpd
STATUS  NAME       TYPE  VERSION       PORTS  NETWORK_IP4
UP      darkhttpd  thin  13.3-RELEASE  -      10.0.0.2
.No # Nm appjail fstab Cm jail Ar darkhttpd
NRO  ENABLED  NAME  DEVICE                MOUNTPOINT                TYPE    OPTIONS  DUMP  PASS
0    1        -     /tmp/.volumes/wwwdir  /usr/local/www/darkhttpd  nullfs  rw       0     0
.No # Nm echo Qo Ar <h1>Hello!</h1> Qc > Pa .volumes/wwwdir/index.html
.No # Nm appjail update Cm release Fl v Ar 14.0-RELEASE
\&.\&.\&.
.No # Nm appjail makejail Fl j Ar darkhttpd Fl o Cm osversion Ns = Ns Ar 14.0-RELEASE
\&.\&.\&.
.No # Nm appjail jail Cm list Fl j Ar darkhttpd
STATUS  NAME       TYPE  VERSION       PORTS  NETWORK_IP4
UP      darkhttpd  thin  14.0-RELEASE  -      10.0.0.2
.No # Nm curl Ar http://10.0.0.2
<h1>Hello!</h1>
.Ed
.Pp
The best part is that we don't need to worry about merging files or anything similar,
but we do need to take into account the files that need to persist after the jail is
created again, especially the files in
.Pa /etc Ns , Pa /usr/local/etc
and the configuration files used by the application running inside the jail, but
those files should only be installed at the creation time and if you need to modify
one of them, modify it on the host and create the jail again with the modified files.
Fortunately, in most cases users do not modify absolutely all configuration files.
.Pp
As a last note, we should keep in mind that old configuration files may or may not
make sense for new FreeBSD versions or new versions of the application you want to
run inside the jail. Fortunately, backward compatibility in many projects is a
priority, but it's worth keeping this note in mind anyway.
.Sh BACKUP / RESTORE
There is nothing magical about backing up a volume. You only have to worry about
a few details:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
Stop the jail if necessary: Almost in most of the situations it is necessary to
stop the jail or the service running inside the jail. Data integrity is important,
and if you back up data that changes constantly, it may be difficult or impossible
to restore it correctly.
.It
Restore the backup as it was: It is very important to note that you need to restore
the backup not only with the data but also with the metadata: file mode, UID, GID
and any other metadata required by the application running inside the jail.
Tools like
.Xr tar 1
are your best friends.
.It
Use the appropriate backup tool: If the service running inside the jail has a backup
tool, perhaps in your situation it is preferable to simply backing up the volume.
.It
Don't leave the backup on the same system: Needless to say, leaving the backup on
the system, even if you have RAID, is a bad practice.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr appjail 1
.Xr appjail-fstab 1
.Xr appjail-image 1
.Xr appjail-jail 1
.Xr appjail-makejail 1
.Xr appjail-update 1
.Xr appjail-upgrade 1
.Xr appjail-volume 1
.Xr appjail-makejail 5
.Xr mount_nullfs 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo Aq Mt DtxdF@disroot.org
