.\"Copyright (c) 2024, Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo <DtxdF@disroot.org>
.\"All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\"* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
.\"  list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\"* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
.\"  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
.\"  and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"* Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
.\"  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"  this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\"THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\"AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\"DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\"FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\"SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\"CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\"OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\"OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd March 12, 2024
.Dt APPJAIL 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm appjail
.Nd Simple and easy-to-use tool for creating portable jails
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm appjail
.Ar command
.Op Ar args Ns " " Ns "..."
.Sh DESCRIPTION
AppJail is an open-source BSD-3 licensed framework entirely written in POSIX shell
and C to create isolated, portable and easy to deploy environments using FreeBSD
jails that behaves like an application.
.Pp
See
.Xr appjail-tutorial 7
to get started and
.Lk https://appjail.readthedocs.io/en/latest/getting-started/ "Getting Started"
if you prefer an online guide.
.Xr appjail-tutorial 7
provides a quick guide to configuring AppJail, RC scripts, the packet filter,
and some recommendations.
.Sy This tutorial is not suitable for all kind of users ","
but for beginners or users who do not need all the features of AppJail.
.Sh SUBCOMMANDS
.Ss Tutorial
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-tutorial 7
A tutorial introduction to AppJail.
.El
.Ss Configuration
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail.conf 5
Configuration parameters for AppJail.
.El
.Ss Image
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-ajspec 5
AJSPEC file specification.
.It Xr appjail-image 1
Create, list, remove, update images and much more.
.El
.Ss Automation
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-initscript 5
Jail automation script.
.It Xr appjail-makejail 5
Build a jail using a Makejail file.
.El
.Ss Templates
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-config 1
Configuration utiliy for templates.
.It Xr appjail-template 5
Template file specification.
.El
.Ss Makejails
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-apply 1
Apply a Makejail to an existing jail.
.It Xr appjail-makejail 1
Build a jail using a Makejail file.
.El
.Ss Networking
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-network
Create, remove or manage virtual networks for jails.
.It Xr appjail-nat 1
Mapping local IPv4 address to an external IPv4 address.
.It Xr appjail-expose 1
Port forwarding from host port to jail port.
.El
.Ss Help
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-help 1
Display help information about AppJail.
.It Xr appjail-usage 1
Display the syntax of a given command.
.It Xr appjail-version 1
Display version information about AppJail.
.El
.Ss DNS
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-dns 8
DNS information for AppJail users.
.El
.Ss ZFS
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-zfs 1
Common ZFS commands for jails.
.El
.Ss Source
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-deleteOld 1
Run delete-old and delete-old-libs targets on a given release or jail.
.It Xr appjail-checkOld 1
Run check-old target on a given release or jail
.It Xr appjail-etcupdate 1
Manage updates to system files not updated by installworld.
.El
.Ss Startup Management
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-restart 1
Restart a running jail.
.It Xr appjail-rstop 1
Stop a jail and the jails it depends on.
.It Xr appjail-stop 1
Stop a running jail.
.It Xr appjail-startup 1
Unattended command to start jails and other related things.
.It Xr appjail-start 1
Start a stopped jail.
.It Xr appjail-status 1
Show the status of a jail.
.El
.Ss Volume Management
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-fstab 1
Static information about the file systems of a jail.
.It Xr appjail-volume 1
Volume management for jails.
.El
.Ss Resource Management
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-limits 1
Display and update resource limits database for jails.
.It Xr appjail-cpuset 1
Configure processor sets for jails.
.El
.Ss Update / Upgrade
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-update 1
Update a thick jail or a release.
.It Xr appjail-upgrade 1
Upgrade a jail or a release.
.El
.Ss Argument Persistence
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-disable 1
Remove default parameters for stages.
.It Xr appjail-enable 1
Set default parameters for stages.
.It Xr appjail-enabled 1
Get the value for a given enabled parameter.
.El
.Ss Supervisor
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-healthcheck 1
Keep your jails healthy and running.
.El
.Ss Logs Management
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-logs 1
Log management for jails.
.El
.Ss Xr rc 8 Management
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-service 1
Control (start/stop/etc.) or list system services within a jail.
.It Xr appjail-sysrc 1
Safely edit system rc files within a jail.
.El
.Ss Trusted Users
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-user 8
Hints and parameters for trusted users.
.El
.Ss Jail Creation
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-jail 1
Creates, removes, lists and configures jails.
.It Xr appjail-quick 1
Create a pre-configured jail.
.El
.Ss Command Execution
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-cmd 1
Execute commands in a jail.
.El
.Ss Dynamic Device Management
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-devfs 1
Dynamic DEVFS ruleset management.
.El
.Ss Package Management
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-pkg 1
Manipulate packages within a jail.
.El
.Ss Release Creation
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-fetch 1
Fetch and extract components to create jails.
.El
.Ss Ephemeral Concept
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-ephemeral 7
cattle, pets and jails.
.El
.Ss Login
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-login 1
Log into the jail.
.El
.Ss User-defined Stages
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Xr appjail-run 1
Run user-defined stages.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
It may fail for one of the following reasons:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
.Em EX_USAGE ":"
The
.Ar command
was not specified.
.It
.Em EX_NOINPUT ":"
The
.Ar command
does not exist.
.It
.Em EX_SOFTWARE ":"
The function responsible for the implementation of the
.Ar command
does not exist.
.It
.Em EX_IOERR ":"
Error creating a ZFS dataset or a directory.
.It
.Em EX_DATAERR ":"
The log name used to record the AppJail session is invalid.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr appjail-tutorial 7
.Xr appjail-help 1
.Xr appjail-usage 1
.Xr sysexits 3
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo Aq Mt DtxdF@disroot.org
