.\"Copyright (c) 2024, Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo <DtxdF@disroot.org>
.\"All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\"* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
.\"  list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\"* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
.\"  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
.\"  and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"* Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
.\"  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"  this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\"THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\"AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\"DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\"FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\"SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\"CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\"OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\"OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd March 27, 2024
.Dt APPJAIL-ETCUPDATE 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm appjail-etcupdate
.Nd Manage updates to system files not updated by installworld
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm appjail etcupdate
.Cm jail
.Op Fl m Ar mode
.Ar jail
.Op Ar args Ns " " Ns "..."
.Nm appjail etcupdate
.Cm release
.Op Fl a Ar arch
.Op Fl m Ar mode
.Op Fl v Ar version
.Op - Ns | Ns Ar release
.Op Ar args Ns " " Ns "..."
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Sy appjail etcupdate
utility is conveniently a wrapper of
.Xr etcupdate 8
for managing updates to files that are not updated as part of
.Pq make installworld
on a jail or release.
.Pp
With
.Fl m
you can change the mode, which defaults to
.Sy update "."
.Pp
If you don't specify which
.Ar release
to apply the update to or simply use
.Sy - ","
.Xr etcupdate 8
will update the default release specified in the
.Sy DEFAULT_RELEASE
parameter.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std "appjail etcupdate"
It may fail for one of the following reasons:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
.Em EX_USAGE ":"
The command was used incorrectly.
.It
.Em EX_DATAERR ":"
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
The log name specified in the
.Sy ETCUPDATELOG_NAME
parameter is invalid.
.It
.Ar jail
is invalid.
.El
.It
.Em EX_NOINPUT ":"
.Ar jail
cannot be found.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr appjail-checkOld 1
.Xr appjail-deleteOld 1
.Xr appjail-fetch 1
.Xr appjail-logs 1
.Xr appjail-update 1
.Xr etcupdate 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo Aq Mt DtxdF@disroot.org
