.\"Copyright (c) 2024, Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo <DtxdF@disroot.org>
.\"All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\"* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
.\"  list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\"* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
.\"  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
.\"  and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"* Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
.\"  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"  this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\"THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\"AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\"DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\"FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\"SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\"CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\"OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\"OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd March 24, 2024
.Dt APPJAIL-CMD 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm appjail-cmd
.Nd Execute commands in a jail
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm appjail cmd
.Cm all
.Op Fl e
.Op Fl i Ar file
.Ar target
.Op Ar args Ns " " Ns "..."
.Nm appjail cmd
.Cm chroot
.Ar jail
.Op Ar command Op Ar args Ns " " Ns "..."
.Nm appjail cmd
.Cm jaildir
.Op Ar command Op Ar args Ns " " Ns "..."
.Nm appjail cmd
.Cm jexec
.Ar jail
.Op Fl l
.Op Op Cm Fl U Ar username Ns | Ns Cm Fl u Ar username
.Op Ar command Op Ar args Ns " " Ns "..."
.Nm appjail cmd
.Cm local
.Ar jail
.Op Op Cm Fl j Ns | Ns Cm Fl r
.Op Ar command Op Ar args Ns " " Ns "..."
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Sy appjail cmd
utility executes commands on a jail or on the host.
.Pp
.Cm all
is used to run the given command in all existing jails. If
.Fl e
is specified,
.Sy appjail cmd
exits when the command returns a non-zero exit status. If
.Fl i
is specified, the content of the file specified by this parameter is used as
input for each call of the given command instead of
.Pa /dev/null "."
.Ar target
is any of the subcommands described below.
.Pp
.Cm chroot
runs the given command in a chroot environment using the jail directory.
.Pp
.Cm jaildir
is used to execute the given command from the host in the directory where the jails are located.
.Pp
.Cm jexec
is used to execute the given command in the given jail. Use the
.Fl l
parameter to not run in a clean environment, or in other words, this is the opposite of the
.Fl l
option specified in
.Xr jexec 8 "."
For a more detailed description of the
.Cm Fl U
and
.Cm Fl u
parameters, see
.Xr jexec 8 "."
.Pp
.Cm local
is used to execute the given command from the host. If
.Cm Fl j
is specified
.Aq default
the jail directory is used, but if 
.Cm Fl r
is specified, the root directory of the jail is used.
.Pp
.Ev SHELL
is used as the command to execute if no command or arguments are specified.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std "appjail cmd"
It may fail for one of the following reasons:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
.Em EX_USAGE ":"
The command was used incorrectly.
.It
.Em EX_NOINPUT ":"
.Ar jail
cannot be found.
.It
.Em EX_DATAERR ":"
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
.Ar jail
is invalid.
.It
An invalid subcommand was specified.
.El
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Ss Example 1 : No Knowing the default directories used by each subcommand
.Bd -literal -compact -offset Ds
.No # Nm appjail jail Cm list Fl j Ar jtest
STATUS  NAME   TYPE  VERSION       PORTS  NETWORK_IP4
UP      jtest  thin  14.0-RELEASE  -      -
.No # Nm appjail cmd Cm chroot Ar jtest Ar pwd
/
.No # Nm appjail cmd Cm jaildir Ar pwd
/usr/local/appjail/jails
.No # Nm appjail cmd Cm jexec Ar jtest Ar pwd
/root
.No # Nm appjail cmd Cm local Ar jtest Ar pwd
/usr/local/appjail/jails/jtest/jail
.No # Nm appjail cmd Cm local Ar jtest Fl r Ar pwd
/usr/local/appjail/jails/jtest
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sh 1
.Xr sysexits 3
.Xr environ 7
.Xr jexec 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo Aq Mt DtxdF@disroot.org
