.\"Copyright (c) 2024, Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo <DtxdF@disroot.org>
.\"All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\"* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
.\"  list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\"* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
.\"  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
.\"  and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"* Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
.\"  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"  this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\"THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\"AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\"DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\"FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\"SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\"CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\"OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\"OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd April 19, 2024
.Dt APPJAIL-NETWORK 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm appjail-network
.Nd Create, remove or manage virtual networks for jails
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm appjail network
.Cm add
.Op Fl O
.Op Fl d Ar description
.Op Fl m Ar mtu
.Ar name
.Ar address Ns / Ns Ar cidr
.Nm appjail network
.Cm assign
.Fl e Ar interface
.Fl j Ar jail
.Fl n Ar network
.Op Fl d
.Op Fl a Oo Cm auto Ns | Ns Cm forceauto Ns | Ns Ar address Oc
.Nm appjail network
.Cm attach
.Op Fl b Ar bridge
.Oo Cm epair Ns | Ns Cm iface Ns : Oc Ns Ar interface Ns " " Ns "..."
.Nm appjail network
.Cm auto-create
.Nm appjail network
.Cm detach
.Op Fl Ddfi
.Op Fl b Ar bridge
.Oo Cm epair Ns | Ns Cm iface Ns : Oc Ns Ar interface Ns " " Ns "..."
.Nm appjail network
.Cm fix
.Op Cm all Ns | Ns Cm dup Ns | Ns Cm addr
.Op Fl n Ar network
.Nm appjail network
.Cm get
.Op Fl eHIpt
.Ar network
.Op Ar keyword Ns " " Ns "..."
.Nm appjail network
.Cm hosts
.Fl a
.Fl n Ar network
.Nm appjail network
.Cm hosts
.Fl d
.Fl n Ar network
.Nm appjail network
.Cm hosts
.Fl e
.Fl j Ar jail
.Nm appjail network
.Cm hosts
.Fl l
.Fl n Ar network
.Nm appjail network
.Cm hosts
.Fl R
.Fl j Ar jail
.Op Fl E
.Op Fl n Ar network
.Nm appjail network
.Cm hosts
.Fl r
.Fl n Ar network
.Op Fl H Ns | Ns Fl N
.Op Fl s
.Nm appjail network
.Cm list
.Op Fl eHIpt
.Op Fl n Ar network
.Op Ar keyword Ns " " Ns "..."
.Nm appjail network
.Cm plug
.Fl e Ar interface
.Fl n Ar network
.Op Fl d Ar description
.Nm appjail network
.Cm remove
.Op Fl df
.Ar network
.Nm appjail network
.Cm reserve
.Fl j Ar jail
.Fl n Ar network
.Op Fl a Oo Cm auto Ns | Ns Cm forceauto Ns | Ns Ar address Oc
.Nm appjail network
.Cm unplug
.Ar network
.Ar interface
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Sy appjail network
utility creates, removes, and manages virtual networks and bridges. A virtual network consists of one configured
.Xr if_bridge 4
interface and zero or more
.Xr if_epair 4
interfaces.
.Pp
Virtual networks are an essential part of AppJail since with them we can use features
such as port forwarding and NAT. Furthermore, this represents a better organization of
our jails without the need for a DHCP server.
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Cm add Oo Fl O Oc Oo Fl d Ar description Oc Oo Fl m Ar mtu Oc Ar name Ar address Ns / Ns Ar cidr
Create a new network called
.Ar name Ns "."
.Pp
.Ar address
must be a valid IPv4 address and
.Ar cidr
must be a non-negative number between
.Sy 0
and
.Sy 30 "."
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xx
.It Fl O
By default, an overlay test is performed to check if the network to be created
overlaps an existing network. This test may be a bit slow if you have many
networks but it avoids some problems.
.It Fl d Ar description
A brief description about the network.
.It Fl m Ar mtu
Network MTU. A valid MTU is a non-negative number between
.Sy 576
and
.Sy 65535 "."
If a network does not have an MTU defined, it uses what is specified by the
.Sy DEFAULT_VIRTUALNET_MTU
parameter.
.El
.It Cm assign Fl e Ar interface Fl j Ar jail Fl n Ar network Oo Fl d Oc Oo Fl a Oo Cm auto Ns | Ns Cm forceauto Ns | Ns Ar address Oc Oc
Assign a non-reserved IPv4 address from
.Ar network
to the
.Xr if_epair 4
.Ar interface
inside
.Ar jail Ns "."
.Pp
If
.Fl d
is specified,
.Ar network
will be set as the default route. No checking is done if a default route already exists.
.Pp
See
.Cm reserve
to learn how the IPv4 address is reserved.
.It Cm attach Oo Fl b Ar bridge Oc Oo Cm epair Ns | Ns Cm iface Ns : Oc Ns Ar interface Ns " " Ns "..."
Attach
.Ar interface
to
.Ar bridge Ns "."
.Pp
If
.Ar bridge
does not exist, it is created. The default bridge is the one specified by the
.Ar SHARED_BRIDGE
parameter.
.Pp
If an interface type of
.Cm epair
.Pq default when none is specified
is specified, an
.Xr if_epair 4
interface is created if it does not exist and if the interface type is
.Cm iface Ns ,
an existing interface is attached to the bridge. Remember that all interfaces on
a bridge must have the same MTU. The first MTU interface is used, so first specify
an
.Cm iface
interface type before an
.Cm epair
interface type. In the case where an interface of type
.Cm epair
is specified first, the MTU specified by the
.Sy DEFAULT_MTU
parameter is used, but note that this may not make sense if an interface of type
.Cm iface
is specified with a different MTU.
.Pp
For an interface of type
.Cm epair Ns ,
two interfaces are created since that is how
.Xr if_epair 4
works, but the interfaces will be called
.Sy sa_ Ns Ar interface No and Sy sb_ Ns Ar interface Ns ,
where the first is for the host and the second for the jail.
.It Cm auto-create
Call the
.Cm add
subcommand with the parameters
.Sy AUTO_NETWORK_ADDR ","
.Sy AUTO_NETWORK_NAME ","
and
.Sy AUTO_NETWORK_DESC
to create a new network. This is the preferred method for creating a network
implicitly as it is more portable and simpler. It is mainly used by
.Xr appjail-quick 1 "."
.It Cm detach Oo Fl Ddfi Oc Oo Fl b Ar bridge Oc Oo Cm epair Ns | Ns Cm iface Ns : Oc Ns Ar interface Ns " " Ns "..."
Detach or destroy
.Ar interface
from
.Ar bridge Ns "."
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xx
.It Fl D
Destroy
.Ar bridge
after detaching or destroying the interfaces.
.It Fl d
Destroy interfaces instead of simply removing them from the bridge.
.Pp
To destroy an interface, it must belong to the
.Sy epair
group; otherwise it is silently ignored. This group is added automatically using
the
.Cm attach
subcommand.
.It Fl f
If the interface is to be removed as a member of the bridge but does not belong
to it, an error may occur. This flag forces this behavior.
.It Fl i
Removes or destroys the interface even if it is not a member of the bridge.
.El
.It Cm fix Oo Cm all Ns | Ns Cm dup Ns | Ns Cm addr Oc Oo Fl n Ar network Oc
Fixes some problems that may occur when using virtual networks.
.Pp
Problems commonly occur because
.Xr appjail-jail 1
is used to import a jail with non-portable parameters, such as an IPv4 address
that does not belong to any existing virtual network or even the IPv4 may be
duplicated. These
.Dq problems
may not be problems at all, as they may occur due to a backup when you need to
duplicate all settings from another system. It is preferable to use
.Xr appjail-quick 1
to import a jail as it forcibly reserves an IPv4 address but only when using a
virtual network, but when you need to export/import a jail in a portable way use
.Xr appjail-image 1
instead.
.Pp
If
.Fl n
is specified, this subcommand operates on the specified network; otherwise, it
operates on all networks.
.It Cm get Oo Fl eHIpt Oc Ar network Oo Ar keyword Ns " " Ns "..." Oc
Get information about a network
.Ns , that is, the
.Ar keyword
that represent the information to be obtained. Multiple keywords can be specified,
which are displayed as a table-like interface in the order in which they are specified.
.No If no Ar keyword No is specified, the defaults are Sy name Ns , Sy network Ns , Sy cidr Ns , Sy broadcast Ns , Sy gateway Ns , Sy minaddr Ns , Sy maxaddr Ns , Sy addresses Ns , Sy description No and Sy mtu Ns "."
.Pp
See
.Sx KEYWORDS
for a list of available keywords.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xx
.It Fl e
Not required when using
.Fl p
.Ns "."
The
.Sy \et
character is used to delimit columns,
so as not to show strange values, this option shows
.Sy <TAB>
instead of
.Sy \et
in the case that a value contains the latter.
.It Fl H
Shows the name of the columns.
.It Fl I
Include empty values. By default, a minus sign is displayed when a value is empty.
.It Fl p
Columnate the list.
.It Fl t
Tabulate columns and values.
.El
.It Cm hosts Fl a Fl n Ar network
List available IPv4 addresses in
.Ar network Ns "."
.It Cm hosts Fl d Fl n Ar network
List the IPv4 addresses that are duplicated in
.Ar network Ns "."
.It Cm hosts Fl e Fl j Ar jail
List the networks to which
.Ar jail
belongs.
.It Cm hosts Fl l Fl n Ar network
List all IPv4 addresses in
.Ar network Ns "."
.It Cm hosts Fl R Fl j Ar jail Oo Fl E Oc Oo Fl n Ar network Oc
List assigned IPv4 addresses for
.Ar jail Ns "."
If
.Fl E
is specified, the network to which the IPv4 addresses belong is displayed.
.Pp
Specify
.Fl e
to display only IPv4 addresses assigned solely for this network.
.It Cm hosts Fl r Fl n Ar network Oo Fl H Ns | Ns Fl N Oc Oo Fl s Oc
List assigned IPv4 addresses in
.Ar network Ns "."
.Pp
If
.Fl N
is specified, the jail name is displayed after its IPv4 address. The network is
shown as
.Sy Default gateway
and the broadcast as
.Sy Broadcast Ns "."
.Pp
Shows the jail's hostname. If
.Fl H
is specified only once and if the jail does not have a hostname defined in its
template, the jail name plus the value specified by the
.Sy HOST_DOMAIN
parameter is displayed as the hostname. If
.Fl H
is specified twice, the jail name plus the network name plus the value specified by the
.Sy HOST_DOMAIN
parameter is displayed as the hostname, and if
.Fl s
or
.Sy SHORTEN_DOMAIN_NAMES
is enabled, the jail name is used as secondary hostname for the network specified
by the
.Sy NETWORK_TO_SHORTEN
parameter.
.Pp
An additional hostname will be added if the current jail has the
.Sy appjail.dns.alt-name
label. This is useful especially when a third-party tool creates a random name
but you want to use a human-readable hostname.
.It Cm list Oo Fl eHIpt Oc Oo Fl n Ar network Oc Oo Ar keyword Ns " " Ns "..." Oc
.No Similar to Cm get No but shows each Ar keyword No for each network in a nice table.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xx
.It Fl e Ns , Fl H Ns , Fl I Ns , Fl p Ns , Fl t
.No All of these options perform the opposite task of the options described in Cm get Ns "."
.It Fl n Ar network
.No Only show information for Ar network Ns "."
.El
.It Cm plug Fl e Ar interface Fl n Ar network Oo Fl d Ar description Oc
Create a new
.Xr if_epair 4
interface and an
.Xr if_bridge 4
interface if it does not exist. The
.Xr if_epair 4
interface is added as a member of the bridge.
.Pp
This subcommand assumes that if the bridge is not in the
.Sy appjail_bridge
group, the bridge is not configured correctly, so it proceeds to configure the parameters specified by the
.Cm add
subcommand.
.Pp
The interfaces
.Sy ea_ Ns Ar interface
and
.Sy eb_ Ns Ar interface
represent the cloned
.Xr if_epair 4 ","
the first being for the host and the second for the jail. After the interfaces are created, the MTU is configured as set by the
.Cm add
subcommand. The
.Sy appjail_epair
group is added to
.Sy ea_ Ns Ar interface Ns "."
If
.Fl d
is specified, a description is added to
.Sy ea_ Ns Ar interface Ns "."
And finally,
.Sy ea_ Ns Ar interface
is added to the bridge.
.It Cm remove Oo Fl df Oc Ar network
Destroy a bridge. To destroy a bridge, it must be in the
.Sy appjail_bridge
group and must have no members unless
.Fl f
is specified.
.Pp
If
.Fl d
is specified, the network is also destroyed, so you can create it again using the
.Cm add
subcommand.
.It Cm reserve Fl j Ar jail Fl n Ar network Oo Fl a Oo Cm auto Ns | Ns Cm forceauto Ns | Ns Ar address Oc Oc
Reserve an IPv4 address for
.Ar jail
from
.Ar network Ns "."
.Pp
If
.Fl a
is set to
.Cm auto
or
.Cm forceauto Ns ,
an IPv4 address is automatically assigned from the network address pool. The difference
between
.Cm auto
and
.Cm forceauto
is that the former does not assign an IPv4 address if the jail has one, the exception
is when the IPv4 is invalid depending on the network configuration, and the latter is
that the IPv4 address is forcibly assigned, that is, the IPv4 address is assigned
even if the jail has one.
.Pp
An IPv4 address can be specified. To be considered valid, it must be a valid IPv4
address and have a correct range depending on the network address and CIDR. The
IPv4 address must not also be reserved by another host.
.It Cm unplug Ar network Ar interface
Destroy
.Sy ea_ Ns Ar interface Ns "."
To destroy the interface, it must be a member of the bridge
.Ar network Ns , must exist, and be in the
.Sy appjail_epair
group.
.El
.Sh KEYWORDS
.Bl -tag -width xx
.It Sy address
Address used when
.Cm add
was executed.
.It Sy addresses
Total number of hosts.
.It Sy broadcast
Broadcast address.
.It Sy cidr
Network prefix.
.It Sy description
Network description.
.It Sy gateway
Default gateway.
.It Sy maxaddr
Last host of the network.
.It Sy minaddr
First host of the network.
.It Sy name
Network name.
.It Sy netmask
Network mask of the network.
.It Sy network
Network address.
.It Sy wildcard
Network mask with its bits inverted.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std "appjail network"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr appjail-expose 1
.Xr appjail-jail 1
.Xr appjail-nat 1
.Xr appjail-quick 1
.Xr sysexits 3
.Xr if_epair 4
.Xr if_bridge 4
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo Aq Mt DtxdF@disroot.org
