.\"Copyright (c) 2024, Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo <DtxdF@disroot.org>
.\"All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\"* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
.\"  list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\"* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
.\"  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
.\"  and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"* Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
.\"  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"  this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\"THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\"AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\"DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\"FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\"SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\"CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\"OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\"OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd March 23, 2024
.Dt APPJAIL-PKG 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm appjail-pkg
.Nd Manipulate packages within a jail
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm appjail pkg
.Cm all
.Op Fl e
.Op Fl i Ar file
.Ar target
.Op Fl -
.Op Ar args "..."
.Nm appjail pkg
.Cm chroot
.Ar jail
.Op Ar args "..."
.Nm appjail pkg
.Cm jail
.Ar jail
.Op Fl j
.Op Ar args "..."
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Sy appjail pkg
utility is a wrapper of the
.Xr pkg 8
command to manipulate packages within a jail.
.Pp
.Cm all
is used to run
.Xr pkg 8
in all existing jails. If
.Fl e
is specified,
.Sy appjail pkg
exits when
.Xr pkg 8
returns a non-zero exit status. If
.Fl i
is specified, the content of the file specified by this parameter is used as
input for each call of
.Xr pkg 8
instead of
.Pa /dev/null "."
If you want to specify a
.Xr pkg 8
parameter in
.Ar args ...
and it starts with a dash, you must use
.Fl -
or
.Sy appjail pkg
will interpret it.
.Ar target
is any of the subcommands described below.
.Pp
.Cm chroot
is used to run
.Xr pkg 8
in a chroot environment using the jail directory. The jail must be started if it
is a thinjail; Otherwise, if it is a thickjail, it can be successfully executed
both started and stopped.
.Pp
.Cm jail
is used to run
.Xr pkg 8
in a given jail. If the
.Fl j
parameter is specified,
.Xr pkg 8
installed inside the jail is used instead of the one on the host.
.Pp
.Cm jail
accepts
.Sy thin ","
.Sy thick
and
.Sy linux+debootstrap
jails, while
.Cm chroot
accepts only
.Sy thin
and
.Sy thick
jails.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std "appjail pkg"
It may fail for one of the following reasons:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
.Em EX_USAGE ":"
The command was used incorrectly.
.It
.Em EX_DATAERR ":"
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
The jail name specified in
.Ar jail
is invalid.
.It
The given command was used in the wrong jail type.
.El
.It
.Em EX_CONFIG ":"
There is something wrong regarding the jail configuration, for example:
.Sy appjail pkg
cannot get some required information.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sysexits 3
.Xr pkg 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo Aq Mt DtxdF@disroot.org
