.\"Copyright (c) 2024, Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo <DtxdF@disroot.org>
.\"All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\"* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
.\"  list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\"* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
.\"  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
.\"  and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"* Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
.\"  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"  this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\"THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\"AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\"DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\"FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\"SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\"CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\"OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\"OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd April 6, 2024
.Dt APPJAIL-EXPOSE 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm appjail-expose
.Nd Port forwarding from host port to jail port
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm appjail expose
.Cm get
.Op Fl eHIipt
.Fl n Ar nro
.Ar jail
.Op Ar keyword Ns " " Ns "..."
.Nm appjail expose
.Cm list
.Op Fl eHIipt
.Op Fl n Ar nro
.Ar jail
.Op Ar keyword Ns " " Ns "..."
.Nm appjail expose
.Cm off
.Ar jail
.Nm appjail expose
.Cm on
.Ar jail
.Nm appjail expose
.Cm remove
.Op Cm all Ns | Ns Cm nro Ar nro
.Ar jail
.Nm appjail expose
.Cm set
.Fl k Ar network
.Fl p Ar hport Ns Op : Ns Ar jport
.Op Op Fl E Ns | Ns Fl e
.Op Op Fl t Ns | Ns Fl u
.Op Fl i Ar interface
.Op Fl l Op - Ns | Ns Ar options
.Op Fl N Ar name
.Op Fl n Op Cm auto Ns | Ns Ar nro
.Op Fl o Ar interface
.Ar jail
.Nm appjail expose
.Cm status
.Ar jail
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Sy appjail expose
utility configures, lists, enables, and disables rules to perform port forwarding
from a host port to a jail port.
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Cm get Oo Fl eHIipt Oc Fl n Ar nro Ar jail Oo Ar keyword Ns " " Ns "..." Oc
Get information about current rules
.Ns , that is, the
.Ar keyword
that represent the information to be obtained. Multiple keywords can be specified,
which are displayed as a table-like interface in the order in which they are specified.
.No If no Ar keyword No is specified, the defaults are Sy nro Ns , Sy enabled Ns , Sy name Ns , Sy ports Ns , Sy protocol No and Sy network_name Ns "."
.Pp
See
.Sx KEYWORDS
for a list of available keywords.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xx
.It Fl e
Not required when using
.Fl p
.Ns "."
The
.Sy \et
character is used to delimit columns,
so as not to show strange values, this option shows
.Sy <TAB>
instead of
.Sy \et
in the case that a value contains the latter.
.It Fl H
Shows the name of the columns.
.It Fl I
Include empty values. By default, a minus sign is displayed when a value is empty.
.It Fl i
Don't complain when
.Ar nro
doesn't exist.
.It Fl p
Columnate the list.
.It Fl t
Tabulate columns and values.
.It Fl n Ar nro
Identifier.
.El
.It Cm list Oo Fl eHIipt Oc Oo Fl n Ar nro Oc Ar jail Oo Ar keyword Ns " " Ns "..." Oc
.No Similar to Cm get No but shows each Ar keyword No for each rule in a nice table.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xx
.It Fl e Ns , Fl H Ns , Fl I Ns , Fl p Ns , Fl t
.No All of these options perform the opposite task of the options described in Cm get Ns "."
.It Fl i
Perform the same task as described in
.Cm get
.Ns "."
.It Fl n Ar nro
.No Only show information for Ar nro Ns "."
.El
.It Cm off Ar jail
Flush the rules currently in use.
.It Cm on Ar jail
Load enabled rules configured by
.Cm set
.Ns "."
.It Cm remove Oo Cm all Ns | Ns Cm nro Ar nro Oc Ar jail
Remove a given rule.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xx
.It Cm all
Remove all rules.
.It Cm nro Ar nro
Remove the rule specified by
.Ar nro
.Ns "."
.El
.It Cm set Fl k Ar network Fl p Ar hport Ns Oo : Ns Ar jport Oc Oo Oo Fl E Ns | Ns Fl e Oc Oc Oo Fl t Ns | Ns Fl u Oc Oo Fl i Ar interface Oc Oo Fl l Oo - Ns | Ns Ar options Oc Oc Oo Fl N Ar name Oc Oo Fl n Oo Cm auto Ns | Ns Ar nro Oc Oc Oo Fl o Ar interface Oc Oc Ar jail
Configure a new or existing rule.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xx
.It Fl k Ar network
Get the jail's IPv4 address from
.Ar network
.Ns , required for the rule.
.Pp
If you are configuring a rule that already has this value,
it becomes optional, so you can ignore it if you wish.
.It Fl p Ar hport Ns Oo : Ns Ar jport Oc
Forward the
.Ar hport
port to the
.Ar jport
port.
.Pp
.Ar hport
is the host or external port and
.Ar jport
if the port currently listening to the application within the jail. If not set,
.Ar hport
is used.
.Pp
Both
.Ar hport
and
.Ar jport
can be specified using symbolic names as described in
.Xr services 5 "."
.Pp
If you are configuring a rule that already has this value,
it becomes optional, so you can ignore it if you wish.
.It Oo Fl E Ns | Ns Fl e Oc
Enable
.Pq Fl E
or disable
.Pq Fl e
this rule.
.It Fl t Ns | Ns Fl u
Use TCP
.Pq Fl t
or UDP
.Pq Fl u
.Ns "."
By default is TCP
.It Fl i Ar interface
Interface to obtain the external IPv4 address. If not set, the interface specified
by the
.Sy EXT_IF
parameter is used.
.It Fl l Oo - Ns | Ns Ar options Oc
Firewall-specific logging options. Use a minus sign to enable logging, but without
options.
.It Fl N Ar name Oc
Service description.
.It Fl n Oo Cm auto Ns | Ns Ar nro Oc
Identifier. An identifier is composed of a positive number. Use
.Cm auto
.Pq default
to get the lowest identifier value.
.It Fl o Ar interface
Apply rules to packets coming in on, or going out through, this interface. If not
set, the interface specified by the
.Sy ON_IF
parameter is used.
.El
.It Cm status Ar jail
Shows the rule that is currently in use or an error if it is not yet applied.
.El
.Sh KEYWORDS
.Bl -tag -width xx
.It Sy enabled
Shows
.Sy 1
if the rule is enabled,
.Sy 0
if it is not.
.It Sy name
Service description.
.It Sy hport
External port.
.It Sy jport
Internal port.
.It Sy ext_if
Interface to obtain the external IPv4 address.
.It Sy on_if
Apply rules to packets coming in on, or going out through, this interface.
.It Sy network_name
Network used to obtain the jail's IPv4 address.
.It Sy nro
Identifier.
.It Sy ports
Exposed ports.
.It Sy protocol
Protocol, i.e. TCP or UDP in lowercase.
.It Sy rule
The rule that will be applied.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std "appjail expose"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr appjail-quick 1
.Xr sysexits 3
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo Aq Mt DtxdF@disroot.org
