.\"Copyright (c) 2024, Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo <DtxdF@disroot.org>
.\"All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\"* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
.\"  list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\"* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
.\"  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
.\"  and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"* Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
.\"  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"  this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\"THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\"AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\"DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\"FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\"SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\"CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\"OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\"OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd March 27, 2024
.Dt APPJAIL-STOP 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm appjail-stop
.Nd Stop a running jail
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm appjail stop
.Op Fl fI
.Ar jail
.Nm appjail stop
.Op Fl f
.Op Cm Fl i Ar initscript
.Oo
.Op Fl p Ar parameter=value
.Ns "..."
.Oc
.Oo
.Op Fl V Ar name=value
.Ns "..."
.Oc
.Ar jail
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Sy appjail stop
utility stops a jail and is responsible for performing some operations:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
Stop a given jail.
.It
Execute the
.Sy stop
stage.
.El
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Fl f
Forcibly stops the jail, meaning that the jail is simply removed regardless of
the parameters defined in the template.
.It Fl i Ar initscript
Pathname to the
.Sy InitScript "."
If no
.Sy InitScript
is provided from the command-line, it will be obtained via
.Xr appjail-enabled 1 "."
If not defined there, the
.Sy InitScript
located in the root directory of the jail is used if it exists and has the execute
bit permission.
.It Fl I
Avoid running the
.Sy InitScript "."
.Xr appjail-enable 1
and
.Xr appjail-disable 1
affects this parameter when it is not specified explicitly from the command-line.
.It Fl p Ar parameter=value Ns " " Ns "..."
Parameters for
.Sy pre- ","
.Sy post-
and
.Sy stop
functions passed with syntax such as
.Ar parameter1=value1
.Ns ,
.Ar parameter2=value=2
.Ns ,
.Ns "...,"
.Ar parameterN=valueN
.Ns .
If no parameters are provided from the command-line, they will be obtained via
.Xr appjail-enabled 1 "."
.It Fl V Ar name=value
Environment variables. Environment variables are defined internally with a syntax such as
.Sy __APPJAIL_RUN_ENVIRONMENT_VAR__<name>=<value>
and validated with a regular expression such as
.Sy "^__APPJAIL_RUN_ENVIRONMENT_VAR__[a-zA-Z_][a-zA-Z0-9_]*(=.*)?$"
.Ns .
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std "appjail stop"
It may fail for one of the following reasons:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
.Em EX_USAGE ":"
The command was used incorrectly.
.It
.Em EX_DATAERR ":"
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
An invalid environment variable was specified.
.It
.Ar jail
is invalid.
.El
.It
.Em EX_NOINPUT ":"
.Ar jail
cannot be found.
.It
.Em EX_SOFTWARE ":"
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
The jail configuration file cannot be found.
.It
The
.Xr jail.conf 5
file generated dynamically by
.Xr appjail-start 1
cannot be found.
.It
The jail is still running when it should not.
.It
The base directory of a
.Sy thinjail
does not exist when it should.
.It
An error ocurred while unmounting the base directory of a
.Sy thinjail "."
.El
.It
.Em EX_NOPERM ":"
The
.Sy InitScript
specified with
.Fl i
does not have the execute bit permission or does not exist.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr appjail-disable 1
.Xr appjail-enable 1
.Xr appjail-enabled 1
.Xr appjail-rstop 1
.Xr sysexits 3
.Xr appjail-initscript 5
.Xr appjail-template 5
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo Aq Mt DtxdF@disroot.org
