.\"Copyright (c) 2024, Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo <DtxdF@disroot.org>
.\"All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\"* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
.\"  list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\"* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
.\"  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
.\"  and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"* Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
.\"  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"  this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\"THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\"AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\"DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\"FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\"SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\"CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\"OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\"OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd March 19, 2024
.Dt APPJAIL-ZFS 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm appjail-zfs
.Nd Common ZFS commands for jails
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm appjail zfs clone-src
.Ar jail
.Ar dst
.Op Ar args ...
.Nm appjail zfs clone-dst
.Ar jail
.Ar src
.Op Ar args ...
.Nm appjail zfs create
.Ar jail
.Op Ar args ...
.Nm appjail zfs destroy
.Ar jail
.Op Ar args ...
.Nm appjail zfs get
.Ar jail
.Op Ar args ...
.Nm appjail zfs inherit
.Ar jail
.Op Ar args ...
.Nm appjail zfs list
.Ar jail
.Op Ar args ...
.Nm appjail zfs recv
.Ar jail
.Op Ar args ...
.Nm appjail zfs send
.Ar jail
.Op Ar args ...
.Nm appjail zfs set
.Ar jail
.Op Ar args ...
.Nm appjail zfs snapshot
.Ar jail
.Op Ar args ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Sy appjail zfs
command provides a wrapper for common ZFS commands that operate to or from a given
jail specified in
.Ar jail "."
.Pp
.Sy clone-dst
and
.Sy clone-src
clone a snapshot of a ZFS dataset.
.Sy clone-dst
will use the jail's dataset as the destination and clone-src as the source.
.Pp
.Sy create ","
.Sy destroy ","
.Sy get ","
.Sy inherit ","
.Sy list ","
.Sy recv ","
.Sy send ","
.Sy set
and
.Sy snapshot
will use the jail's dataset as the destination for their operations.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std "appjail zfs"
It may fail for one of the following reasons:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
.Em EX_USAGE ":"
The command was used incorrectly.
.It
.Em EX_CONFIG ":"
ZFS is not enabled in your AppJail configuration file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sysexits 3
.Xr appjail-conf 5
.Xr zfs-clone 8
.Xr zfs-create 8
.Xr zfs-destroy 8
.Xr zfs-get 8
.Xr zfs-inherit 8
.Xr zfs-list 8
.Xr zfs-recv 8
.Xr zfs-send 8
.Xr zfs-set 8
.Xr zfs-snapshot 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo Aq Mt DtxdF@disroot.org
