.\"Copyright (c) 2024, Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo <DtxdF@disroot.org>
.\"All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\"* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
.\"  list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\"* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
.\"  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
.\"  and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"* Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
.\"  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"  this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\"THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\"AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\"DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\"FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\"SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\"CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\"OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\"OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd April 8, 2024
.Dt APPJAIL-MAKEJAIL 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm appjail-makejail
.Nd Build a jail using a Makejail file
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm appjail makejail
.Op Fl c
.Op Fl ev
.Op Fl a Ar makejail
.Op Fl B Ar makejail
.Op Oo Fl b Ar build-arg Ns Oo = Ns Ar value Oc Oc Ns " " Ns "..."
.Op Fl f Ar makejail
.Op Fl j Ar name
.Op Oo Fl o Ar option Oc Ns " " Ns "..."
.Op Oo Fl V Ar name Ns = Ns Ar value Oc Ns " " Ns "..."
.Op -- Ar runtime-args Ns " " Ns "..."
.Nm appjail makejail
.Fl A
.Fl j Ar name
.Op Fl c
.Op Fl a Ar makejail
.Op Fl B Ar makejail
.Op Oo Fl b Ar build-arg Ns Oo = Ns Ar value Oc Oc Ns " " Ns "..."
.Op Fl f Ar makejail
.Op Oo Fl V Ar name Ns = Ns Ar value Oc Ns " " Ns "..."
.Op -- Ar runtime-args Ns " " Ns "..."
.Nm appjail makejail
.Op Fl E
.Fl d Ar id
.Nm appjail makejail
.Fl l
.Nm appjail makejail
.Op Fl E
.Fl u
.Op Ar id Ns | Ns Cm *
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Sy appjail makejail
utility can create a
.Xr jail 8
or apply a
.Sy Makejail
file to an existing one, whether obtained from a remote or local site. You can also maintain cloned
.Xr git 1
repositories, that is, list, delete or update them.
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Oo Fl c Oc Oo Fl ev Oc Oo Fl a Ar makejail Oc Oo Fl B Ar makejail Oc Oo Oo Fl b Ar build-arg Ns Oo = Ns Ar value Oc Oc Ns " " Ns "..." Oc Oo Fl f Ar makejail Oc Oo Fl j Ar name Oc Oo Oo Fl o Ar option Oc Ns " " Ns "..." Oc Oo Oo Fl V Ar name Ns = Ns Ar value Oc Ns " " Ns "..." Oc Oo -- Ar runtime-args Ns " " Ns "..." Oc
Build a jail using a Makejail file.
.Pp
This parameter is responsible for generating scripts using a Makejail file. Generates two types of scripts: a
.Sy BuildScript
and an
.Sy InitScript "."
Both are a
.Xr sh 1
script, but a
.Sy BuildScript
contains all the instructions specified in the
.Sy build
stage, which are executed using this parameter, and an
.Sy InitScript
is executed using other commands, such as
.Xr appjail-start 1 ","
.Xr appjail-stop 1 ","
.Xr appjail-run 1 ","
and so on. This parameter does not run the
.Sy InitScript ","
the exception is for the
.Sy apply
stage which is run with this command or with
.Xr appjail-apply 1
.Po which is just a wrapper for the Fl A No option Pc Ns "."
.Pp
Note that because this parameter generates an
.Sy InitScript ","
it overwrites any others that were specified by
.Xr appjail-quick 1 Ns 's Sy initscript No option.
.Pp
Before generating the
.Sy BuildScript ","
a single Makejail is created with all
.Sy INCLUDE
instructions processed.
.Pp
You can't include a Makejail more than once to avoid possible loops, although the
check is very basic: the path to the Makejail file.
.Pp
As a last note, the jail should be stopped if the
.Sy start
stage is specified in the Makejail file only if the instructions specified there are to be executed after the
.Sy appjail makejail
command finishes. The reason is that the
.Sy start
stage was executed before the
.Sy InitScript
was written and can't be executed because the
.Sy InitScript
is not written until the
.Sy appjail makejail
command finishes, so stopping the jail is the only way: the user will run
.Xr appjail-start 1
and the
.Sy start
stage runs without problems.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xx
.It Fl c
Create a jail. This is the default parameter when no other is specified.
.It Fl e
By default,
.Sy appjail makejail
will exit if it detects a command that returns a non-zero value; This parameter will
continue even if such a thing happens.
.It Fl v
Shows each command to be executed before executing it.
.It Fl a Ar makejail
This parameter adds a new
.Sy INCLUDE
instruction after all instructions specified in the
.Sy build
stage.
.Ar makejail
is used as an argument to the
.Sy INCLUDE
instruction.
.It Fl B Ar makejail
Same as
.Fl a
but adds the
.Sy INCLUDE
instruction before all instructions specified in the
.Sy build
stage.
.It Fl b Ar build-arg Ns Oo = Ns Ar value Oc
If
.Ar makejail
contains build arguments, this parameter sets the argument value.
.It Fl f Ar makejail
This parameter performs the same task as the
.Xr appjail-makejail 5 Ns 's Sy INCLUDE No instruction.
.It Fl o Ar option
Specify an
.Xr appjail-quick 1 Ns 's option.
.It Fl V Ar name Ns = Ns Ar value
Specify environment variables used by the
.Sy RUN
instruction in the
.Sy build
stage. See
.Xr appjail-makejail 5 Ns 's Sy ENV No instruction for more details.
.It Ar runtime-args
Arguments used by the Makejail in the
.Sy build
stage. Because arguments must be prefixed with a double dash
.Po e.g. --arg1, --arg2 ... --argN Pc Ns ,
you must use -- before specifying them so that
.Xr appjail-makejail 1
stops processing parameters.
.El
.It Fl A Fl j Ar name Oo Fl c Oc Oo Fl ev Oc Oo Fl a Ar makejail Oc Oo Fl B Ar makejail Oc Oo Oo Fl b Ar build-arg Ns Oo = Ns Ar value Oc Oc Ns " " Ns "..." Oc Oo Fl f Ar makejail Oc Oo Oo Fl o Ar option Oc Ns " " Ns "..." Oc Oo Oo Fl V Ar name Ns = Ns Ar value Oc Ns " " Ns "..." Oc Oo -- Ar runtime-args Ns " " Ns "..." Oc
See
.Fl c
parameter and
.Xr appjail-apply 1 "."
.It Oo Fl E Oc Fl d Ar id
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xx
.It Fl E
Exact match.
.It Fl d Ar id
Cloned
.Xr git 1
repository ID.
.Pp
You can specify an incomplete ID
.Po e.g. the first few characters Pc Ns ,
but if more than one repository matches, this parameter will not allow you to continue
due to ambiguity. Certainly, deleting a repository shouldn't be a mistake because
such repositories should be ephemeral, but this may not be desirable in certain
scenarios.
.El
.It Fl l
List the currently cloned
.Xr git 1
repositories.
.It Oo Fl E Oc Fl u Oo Ar id Ns | Ns Cm * Oc
Update cloned
.Xr git 1
repositories.
.Bl -tag -width xx
.It Fl E
Exact match.
.It Fl u Oo Ar id Ns | Ns Cm * Oc
Cloned
.Xr git 1
repository ID.
.Pp
You can specify an incomplete ID
.Po e.g. the first few characters Pc Ns ,
.Xr appjail-makejail 1
will update all matching repositories. Use
.Cm *
to update all repositories. If you specify
.Fl E Ns ,
you must provide a complete ID.
.El
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std "appjail makejail"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr appjail-quick 1
.Xr sysexits 3
.Xr appjail-initscript 5
.Xr appjail-makejail 5
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo Aq Mt DtxdF@disroot.org
