.\"Copyright (c) 2024, Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo <DtxdF@disroot.org>
.\"All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\"* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
.\"  list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\"* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
.\"  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
.\"  and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"* Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
.\"  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"  this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\"THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\"AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\"DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\"FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\"SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\"CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\"OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\"OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd March 24, 2024
.Dt APPJAIL-STARTUP 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm appjail-startup
.Nd Unattended command to start jails and other related things
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm appjail startup
.Cm start
.Cm healthcheckers
.Nm appjail startup
.Op Cm restart Ns | Ns Cm start Ns | Ns Cm stop
.Op Cm jails Ns | Ns Cm "nat networks"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Sy appjail startup
utility starts jails, performs NAT per network, and starts healthcheckers at startup
without user intervention. This is the core of RC scripts.
.Pp
Unlike jails and network NAT, starting healthcheckers is a long-term operation,
so only the
.Sy start
command
is implemented. Remember that healthcheckers can be stopped using the RC script
or when all healthcheckers are stopped, i.e. they fail.
.Pp
.Sy jails
only starts jails that have the
.Sy boot
flag set. This command organizes the list of jails using a priority that is set
individually for each jail: jails with a lower number
.Aq starting from 0
are started first. If the
.Sy USE_PARALLEL
parameter is enabled, jails are started in parallel depending on their priority, e.g. if we have jails
.Sy A
.Aq 0
.Ns ,
.Sy B
.Aq 0
.Ns ,
.Sy C
.Aq 1
and
.Sy D
.Aq 2
.Ns ,
jails
.Sy A
and
.Sy B
are started first
.Aq in parallel
.Ns ,
then
.Sy C
is started and then
.Sy D
is started.
.Pp
.Sy nat networks
performs NAT per network at startup. If the
.Sy USE_PARALLEL_NATNET
parameter is enabled, this operation is performed in parallel.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std "appjail startup"
It may fail for one of the following reasons:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
.Em EX_DATAERR ":"
The log name specified in the
.Sy STARTUPLOG_NAME
parameter is invalid.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr appjail-jail 1
.Xr appjail-rstop 1
.Xr appjail-start 1
.Xr appjail-stop 1
.Xr sysexits 3
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo Aq Mt DtxdF@disroot.org
