.\"Copyright (c) 2024, Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo <DtxdF@disroot.org>
.\"All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\"* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
.\"  list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\"* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
.\"  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
.\"  and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"* Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
.\"  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"  this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\"THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\"AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\"DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\"FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\"SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\"CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\"OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\"OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd March 19, 2024
.Dt APPJAIL-CPUSET 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm appjail-cpuset
.Nd Configure processor sets for jails
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm appjail cpuset
.Ar jail
.Nm appjail cpuset
.Ar jail
.Ar cpu-list
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Sy appjail cpuset
command uses
.Xr cpuset 1
to configure processor sets specified in
.Ar cpu-list
for the jail specified in
.Ar jail "."
If
.Ar cpu-list
is not specified, the
.Sy appjail cpuset
command will show you the CPU sets assigned for the given jail.
.Pp
If you want to use this command to assign a processor sets, you must place this
command in the template for the jail specified in
.Ar jail ","
although it is much easier and recommended to use
.Xr appjail-quick 1
instead.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std "appjail cpuset"
It may fail for one of the following reasons:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
.Em EX_USAGE ":"
The command was used incorrectly.
.It
.Em EX_NOINPUT ":"
The jail specified in
.Ar jail
cannot be found.
.It
.Em EX_DATAERR ":"
The jail name specified in
.Ar jail
is invalid.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr appjail-limits 1
.Xr appjail-quick 1
.Xr cpuset 1
.Xr sysexits 3
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo Aq Mt DtxdF@disroot.org
