.\"Copyright (c) 2024, Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo <DtxdF@disroot.org>
.\"All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\"* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
.\"  list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\"* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
.\"  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
.\"  and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"* Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
.\"  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"  this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\"THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\"AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\"DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\"FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\"SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\"CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\"OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\"OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd April 13, 2024
.Dt APPJAIL-UPDATE 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm appjail-update
.Nd Update a thick jail or a release
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm appjail update
.Cm jail
.Op Fl bfKk
.Op Fl j Ar jobs
.Ar jail
.Nm appjail update
.Cm release
.Op Fl f
.Op Fl a Ar arch
.Op Fl v Ar version
.Op Ar release
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Sy appjail update
is a utility to fetch and install updates to a jail or a release.
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width -xxx
.It Cm jail Oo Fl bfKk Oc Oo Fl j Ar jobs Oc Ar jail
Update
.Ar jail Ns "."
.Pp
You can only update a thick jail, except when it comes from an empty release.
.Pp
This subcommand updates a thick jail using
.Xr freebsd-update 8
.Pq binary updates
or using the FreeBSD source tree
.Po source updates Pc Ns ;
However, it depends entirely on how this jail was created. For thin jails, it is
not possible to use this subcommand, but there are at least two methods: the first
method uses
.Xr appjail-etcupdate 8
after updating the release that uses the thin jail and the second method is to
separate the data that needs to be persisted from data that is considered ephemeral,
so you can destroy and recreate a jail, but preserving the non-ephemeral data.
.Pp
Note that when the jail comes from a build from the FreeBSD source tree, the release
is linked indirectly. To detect that the jail comes from a build from the FreeBSD
source tree, to obtain the kernel configuration file, architecture, version and other
parameters this subcommand uses the release directory, since those parameters are
stored there. This is important if you want to export the jail and the release on
another system.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xx
.It Fl b
Build the world and, if the kernel was compiled successfully when building the release
.Pq and if Fl K No is not specified
or
.Fl k
is specified, the kernel.
.It Fl f
Force
.Xr freebsd-update 8 Cm fetch
to proceed in the case of an unfinished upgrade. Ignored when the jail was created
using a build from the FreeBSD source tree.
.It Fl K
By default, this subcommand detects whether a kernel has been compiled successfully
when the release is created, so it will proceed to install the kernel again and, if
.Fl b
is specified, it will build the kernel again. This option disables this behavior.
.It Fl k
Build and install the kernel even if it is not necessary, that is, when it was not
compiled correctly or at all when creating the release.
.It Fl j Ar jobs
Number of jobs. If this option is not set, the number of jobs specified by the
.Sy JOBS
parameter is used.
.El
.It Cm release Oo Fl f Oc Oo Fl a Ar arch Oc Oo Fl v Ar version Oc Oo Ar release Oc
Update
.Ar release Ns "."
.Pp
A release cannot be updated if it was created using a build from the FreeBSD source
tree or if it is an empty release. On the one hand, an empty release is assumed to
be the user, you, the only person who knows how to update it, and on the other hand,
to update a release that was created using a build from the FreeBSD source tree,
.Xr appjail-fetch 1
should be used and, if your workflow requires it, you should also use
.Xr appjail-etcupdate 1
and
.Xr appjail-deleteOld 1 "."
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xx
.It Fl f
Force
.Xr freebsd-update 8 Cm fetch
to proceed in the case of an unfinished upgrade.
.It Fl a Ar arch
Update
.Ar release
with the given architecture.
.It Fl v Ar version
Update
.Ar release
with the given version.
.El
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xx
.El
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std "appjail update"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr appjail-checkOld 1
.Xr appjail-etcupdate 1
.Xr appjail-deleteOld 1
.Xr appjail-fetch 1
.Xr appjail-upgrade 1
.Xr sysexits 3
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo Aq Mt DtxdF@disroot.org
