.\"Copyright (c) 2024, Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo <DtxdF@disroot.org>
.\"All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\"* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
.\"  list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\"* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
.\"  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
.\"  and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"* Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
.\"  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"  this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\"THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\"AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\"DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\"FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\"SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\"CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\"OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\"OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd December 07, 2024
.Dt APPJAIL-OCI 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm appjail-oci
.Nd Commands for interpreting OCI images
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm appjail oci
.Cm del-env
.Ar jail
.Ar name
.Nm appjail oci
.Cm del-user
.Ar jail
.Nm appjail oci
.Cm del-workdir
.Ar jail
.Nm appjail oci
.Cm exec
.Op Fl d
.Oo
.Op Fl e Ar name Ns Oo = Ns Ar value Oc
.Ns "..."
.Oc
.Op Fl u Ar user
.Op Fl w Ar workdir
.Ar jail
.Op Ar command Op Ar args Ns " " Ns "..."
.Nm appjail oci
.Cm from
.Ar image
.Ar jail
.Op Ar options No "..."
.Nm appjail oci
.Cm get-container-name
.Ar jail
.Nm appjail oci
.Cm get-env
.Ar jail
.Ar name
.Nm appjail oci
.Cm get-pid
.Ar jail
.Nm appjail oci
.Cm get-user
.Ar jail
.Nm appjail oci
.Cm get-workdir
.Ar jail
.Nm appjail oci
.Cm kill
.Op Fl s Ar signal
.Ar jail
.Nm appjail oci
.Cm ls-env
.Ar jail
.Nm appjail oci
.Cm mount
.Ar jail
.Nm appjail oci
.Cm run
.Op Fl d
.Oo
.Op Fl e Ar name Ns Oo = Ns Ar value Oc
.Ns "..."
.Oc
.Oo
.Op Fl o Ar option
.Ns "..."
.Oc
.Op Fl u Ar user
.Op Fl w Ar workdir
.Ar image
.Ar jail
.Op Ar command Op Ar args Ns " " Ns "..."
.Nm appjail oci
.Cm set-boot
.Op Cm off Ns | Ns Cm on
.Ar jail
.Nm appjail oci
.Cm set-container-name
.Ar container-name
.Ar jail
.Nm appjail oci
.Cm set-env
.Ar jail
.Ar name
.Op Ar value
.Nm appjail oci
.Cm set-user
.Ar jail
.Ar user
.Nm appjail oci
.Cm set-workdir
.Ar jail
.Ar workdir
.Nm appjail oci
.Cm umount
.Ar jail
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Sy appjail oci
utility provides support for interpreting OCI images, this includes creating a
jail using an image, executing the process defined by the image, and so on.
.Pp
.Sy You must install Em sysutils/buildah Sy and Em textproc/jq Sy before using this command.
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Cm del-env Ar jail Ar name
Removes a user-defined environment variable that was previously specified by
.Cm set-env Ns "."
.It Cm del-user Ar jail
Removes a user-defined username that was previously specified by
.Cm set-user Ns "."
.It Cm del-workdir Ar jail
Removes a user-defined working directory that was previously specified by
.Cm set-workdir Ns "."
.It Cm exec Oo Fl d Oc Oo Oo Fl e Ar name Ns Oo = Ns Ar value Oc Oc No "..." Oc Oo Fl u Ar user Oc Oo Fl w Ar workdir Oc Ar jail Oo Ar command Oo Ar args No "..." Oc Oc
Executes the command specified by the OCI image. The command to be executed is a combination of the entrypoint and its arguments. Environment variables are also set if the OCI image contains them. If the OCI image specifies a user, the process is executed as such, and if the working directory is specified by the OCI image, the process is executed in that directory
.Po which should exist Pc Ns "."
.Pp
The command can be changed if positional arguments are defined, the working directory
can be changed using the
.Fl w
parameter, the user to run the process as can be changed using the
.Fl u
parameter and more environment variables can be specified using the
.Fl e
parameter.
.Pp
The working directory, user and environment variables can also be specified using
.Cm set-workdir Ns ,
.Cm set-user
and
.Cm set-env Ns "."
Command-line arguments take precedence over these subcommands. If no parameters
are specified using command-line arguments or the aforementioned subcommands,
the values depend entirely on those specified by the OCI image. If the OCI
image has no such values, the working directory will be
.Sy / Ns ,
the user will be
.Sy root Ns ,
and no environment variables will be specified except those specified by the
.Xr jexec 8 Ns 's Fl l
parameter.
.Pp
Note that a Linux image will probably not work if you or the image itself specifies a user because the
.Xr getpwent 3
function does not work in such an environment. Also some Linux images may specify a user as
.Sy UID Ns : Ns Sy GID
which is not valid by
.Xr jexec 8
because it expects a user as
.Sy USERNAME Ns ,
which has the advantage of being more human readable and should also exist in the
environment.
.Pp
If the
.Fl d
parameter is specified, the process runs in the background.
.It Cm from Ar image Ar jail Oo Ar options No "..." Oc
This is a wrapper for the
.Cm from
option of the
.Xr appjail-quick 1
command.
.It Cm get-container-name Ar jail
Get the container assigned to
.Ar jail Ns "."
.It Cm get-env Ar jail Ar name
Gets the value of an environment variable previously specified by
.Cm set-env Ns "."
.It Cm get-pid Ar jail
If the
.Fl d
parameter was specified when executing
.Cm exec
or
.Xr appjail-start 1
executes the process, this subcommand displays the PID of that process only
if it is running.
.It Cm get-user Ar jail
Gets the user previously specified by
.Cm set-user Ns "."
.It Cm get-workdir Ar jail
Gets the working directory previously specified by
.Cm set-workdir Ns "."
.It Cm kill Oo Fl s Ar signal Oc Ar jail
If the process executed in the background by
.Cm exec
is running, this subcommand will kill it using the signal specified by the OCI
image. The signal can be overwritten by the
.Fl s
parameter and if none is specified,
.Sy SIGTERM
will be used. This is used by
.Xr appjail-stop 1
to stop the process.
.It Cm ls-env Ar jail
Lists all environment variables previously specified by
.Cm set-env Ns "."
.It Cm mount Ar jail
Mount the container directory in the jail directory.
.It Cm run Oo Fl d Oc Oo Oo Fl e Ar name Ns Oo = Ns Ar value Oc Oc No "..." Oc Oo Oo Fl o Ar option Oc No "..." Oc Oo Fl u Ar user Oc Oo Fl w Ar workdir Oc Ar jail Oo Ar command Oo Ar args No "..." Oc Oc
This subcommand first calls
.Cm from
with the options specified by
.Fl o Ns ,
then calls
.Cm exec Ns "."
The
.Xr appjail-quick 1 Ns 's
.Cm start
option is always used.
.It Cm set-boot Oo Cm off Ns | Ns Cm on Oc Ar jail
Specify
.Cm on
to start the process in background using
.Xr appjail-start 1
or
.Cm off
otherwise.
.It Cm set-container-name Ar container-name Ar jail
Sets the container that will be linked to this jail.
.It Cm set-env Ar jail Ar name Oo Ar value Oc
Sets an environment variable or overwrites a previously existing one.
.It Cm set-user Ar jail Ar user
Sets the user or overwrites a previously existing one.
.It Cm set-workdir Ar jail Ar workdir
Sets the working directory or overwrites a previously existing one.
.It Cm umount Ar jail
Unmount the container directory previously mounted by
.Cm mount Ns "."
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr appjail-jail 1
.Xr appjail-start 1
.Xr appjail-stop 1
.Xr appjail-quick 1
.Xr getpwent 3
.Xr appjail.conf 5
.Xr jexec 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo Aq Mt DtxdF@disroot.org
