.\"Copyright (c) 2024, Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo <DtxdF@disroot.org>
.\"All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\"* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
.\"  list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\"* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
.\"  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
.\"  and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"* Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
.\"  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"  this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\"THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\"AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\"DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\"FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\"SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\"CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\"OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\"OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd March 27, 2024
.Dt APPJAIL-START 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm appjail-start
.Nd Start a stopped jail
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm appjail start
.Op Cm Fl I
.Op Fl t Ar template
.Ar jail
.Nm appjail start
.Op Cm Fl i Ar initscript
.Oo
.Op Fl c Ar parameter=value
.Ns "..."
.Oc
.Oo
.Op Fl s Ar parameter=value
.Ns "..."
.Oc
.Op Fl t Ar template
.Oo
.Op Fl V Ar name=value
.Ns "..."
.Oc
.Ar jail
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Sy appjail start
utility starts a jail and is responsible for performing many operations:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
Lock the jail to avoid starting it twice by a second process while doing this
operation on the first.
.It
Start a given jail.
.It
Start other jails on which it depends.
.It
Execute the
.Sy create
and
.Sy start
stages.
.It
Check the template for syntax errors.
.It
Warns the user about required parameters that are not yet configured in the template.
.It
Load DEVFS rules that were created using
.Xr appjail-devfs 1 "."
.It
Configure parameters that were not defined in the template file, such as
.Sy exec.consolelog ","
.Sy mount.fstab ","
.Sy host.hostname.
.It
Stop a failed jail.
.El
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Fl c Ar parameter=value Ns " " Ns "..."
Parameters for
.Sy pre- ","
.Sy post-
and
.Sy create
functions passed with syntax such as
.Ar parameter1=value1
.Ns ,
.Ar parameter2=value=2
.Ns ,
.Ns "...,"
.Ar parameterN=valueN
.Ns .
If no parameters are provided from the command-line, they will be obtained via
.Xr appjail-enabled 1 "."
.It Fl i Ar initscript
Pathname to the
.Sy InitScript "."
If no
.Sy InitScript
is provided from the command-line, it will be obtained via
.Xr appjail-enabled 1 "."
If not defined there, the
.Sy InitScript
located in the root directory of the jail is used if it exists and has the execute
bit permission.
.It Fl I
Avoid running the
.Sy InitScript "."
.Xr appjail-enable 1
and
.Xr appjail-disable 1
affects this parameter when it is not specified explicitly from the command-line.
.It Fl s Ar parameter=value Ns " " Ns "..."
Parameters for
.Sy pre- ","
.Sy post-
and
.Sy start
functions passed with syntax such as
.Ar parameter1=value1
.Ns ,
.Ar parameter2=value=2
.Ns ,
.Ns "...,"
.Ar parameterN=valueN
.Ns .
If no parameters are provided from the command-line, they will be obtained via
.Xr appjail-enabled 1 "."
.It Fl t Ar template
Pathname to the template file. If not specified, the template is retrieved from
.Xr appjail-enabled 1
and if it does not have a pathname to the template, the default one found in the
root directory of the jail is used, and if it does not exist, the default
template specified in the
.Sy DEFAULT_TEMPLATE
parameter is used.
.It Fl V Ar name=value
Environment variables. Environment variables are defined internally with a syntax such as
.Sy __APPJAIL_RUN_ENVIRONMENT_VAR__<name>=<value>
and validated with a regular expression such as
.Sy "^__APPJAIL_RUN_ENVIRONMENT_VAR__[a-zA-Z_][a-zA-Z0-9_]*(=.*)?$"
.Ns .
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std "appjail start"
It may fail for one of the following reasons:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
.Em EX_USAGE ":"
The command was used incorrectly.
.It
.Em EX_DATAERR ":"
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
An invalid environment variable was specified.
.It
.Ar jail
is invalid.
.It
The log name specified in the
.Sy CONSOLELOG_NAME
parameter is invalid.
.El
.It
.Em EX_NOINPUT ":"
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
.Ar jail
cannot be found.
.It
The template file specified with
.Fl t
cannot be found.
.El
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr appjail-disable 1
.Xr appjail-enable 1
.Xr appjail-enabled 1
.Xr sysexits 3
.Xr appjail-initscript 5
.Xr appjail-template 5
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo Aq Mt DtxdF@disroot.org
