.\"Copyright (c) 2024, Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo <DtxdF@disroot.org>
.\"All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\"* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
.\"  list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\"* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
.\"  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
.\"  and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"* Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
.\"  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"  this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\"THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\"AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\"DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\"FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\"SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\"CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\"OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\"OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd March 27, 2024
.Dt APPJAIL-ENABLE 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm appjail-enable
.Nd Set default parameters for stages
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm appjail enable
.Ar jail
.Cm start
.Op Fl I
.Oo
.Op Fl c Ar parameter=value
.Ns "..."
.Oc
.Op Fl i Ar initscript
.Oo
.Op Fl s Ar parameter=value
.Ns "..."
.Oc
.Op Fl t Ar template
.Oo
.Op Fl V Ar name=value
.Ns "..."
.Oc
.Nm appjail enable
.Ar jail
.Cm stop
.Op Fl I
.Op Fl i Ar initscript
.Op Fl p Ar parameter=value
.Op Fl V Ar name=value
.Nm appjail enable
.Ar jail
.Cm run
.Op Fl i Ar initscript
.Oo
.Op Fl p Ar parameter=value
.Ns "..."
.Oc
.Oo
.Op Fl V Ar name=value
.Ns "..."
.Oc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Sy appjail enable
utility sets default parameters for the stages used by the
.Xr appjail-start 1 ","
.Xr appjail-stop 1
and
.Xr appjail-run 1
commands. These parameters are used when the user does not specify one explicitly from the
command-line and are more relevant when the stages are executed without user intervention,
e.g. at startup. These commands mimic the command-line arguments used by those commands.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std "appjail enable"
It may fail for one of the following reasons:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
.Em EX_USAGE ":"
The command was used incorrectly.
.It
.Em EX_NOINPUT ":"
.Ar jail
cannot be found.
.It
.Em EX_SOFTWARE ":"
Error creating the directory where files used by this command are stored.
.It
.Em EX_DATAERR ":"
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
An invalid option was specified.
.It
.Ar jail
is invalid.
.El
.It
.Em EX_IOERR ":"
Error writing the contents of a file used by the specified parameter.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr appjail-disable 1
.Xr appjail-enabled 1
.Xr appjail-run 1
.Xr appjail-start 1
.Xr appjail-stop 1
.Xr sysexits 3
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo Aq Mt DtxdF@disroot.org
