.\"Copyright (c) 2024, Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo <DtxdF@disroot.org>
.\"All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\"* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
.\"  list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\"* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
.\"  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
.\"  and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"* Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
.\"  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"  this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\"THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\"AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\"DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\"FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\"SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\"CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\"OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\"OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd March 28, 2024
.Dt APPJAIL-TEMPLATE 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm appjail-template
.Nd Template file specification
.Sh DESCRIPTION
A
.Sy Template
is a file that contains the
.Xr jail 8
parameters used by a jail. Unlike
.Xr jail.conf 5 ","
this one is intended to be easily interpreted by both humans and computers.
.Pp
However, since the
.Xr jail 8
utility reads a
.Xr jail.conf 5
file,
.Xr appjail-config 1
has the ability to convert a
.Sy Template
to a valid
.Xr jail.conf 5
file.
.Sh TOKENS
One or more words are separated by spaces. To use spaces in words, the word can
be enclosed in single or double quotes. Single and double quotes can be escaped
using a backslash character
.Pq Sq \e
.Ns .
The backslash character followed by a character other
than the quotation mark
.Pq depending on whether it is single or double
will write without escaping.
.Ss Example 1: 
The string
.So
.Qq Hello, world
.Qq Escaping \e\&"
.Sc
.Dc
will be tokenized as follows:
.Bd -literal -compact -offset Ds
Hello, world
Escaping \&"
.Ed
.Ss Example 2:
To escape a quote within a token, you must use the escape character followed by the same type of quote
.Pq i.e. single or double quotes
.Ns .
That's why the second token can't escape the quotes using a string such as
.br
.So
.Ns \&'\e'\&'
.Qq \e\&'
.Sc
.Ns :
.Bd -literal -compact -offset Ds
\&'
\e\&\&'
.Ed
.Sh FORMAT
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
The
.Sy Template
is parsed line by line.
.It
Comments and empty lines are ignored.
.It
A comment is a trimmed line starting with
.Sy # "."
You don't have to worry about trimming a line, AppJail will do it for you, internally
of course.
.It
Each non-ignored line is a parameter.
.It
A parameter is made up of a key and a value separated by
.Sy :
or
.Sy :+ "."
.It
Parameters starting with
.Sy *
are required parameters.
.It
How the required parameters are treated is entirely up to the consumer, but at
least for
.Xr appjail-start 1 ","
it will not start the jail until the user sets values for the required parameters.
.It
A key is made up of
.Sy - ","
.Sy _ ","
.Sy . ","
alphanumeric characters and spaces.
.It
Spaces in keys are only valid for variables.
.It
A variable is a key that begins with
.Sy $
and can optionally be enclosed in curly braces.
.It
How variables are treated is entirely up to the consumer, but at least for
.Xr jail 8
they have special meaning. This is relevant when
.Xr appjail-start 1
generates the
.Xr jail.conf 5
file.
.It
The value is optional.
.It
The value will be tokenized following the rules specified in
.Sx TOKENS
.Ns .
.It
The tokens obtained from the value are formally called columns.
.It
More than one parameter can be specified and they are formally called rows.
.It
The first row should be specified with
.Sy :
and subsequent rows with
.Sy :+ ","
but the first row can also be specified with
.Sy :+ "."
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr appjail-config 1
.Xr jail.conf 5
.Xr jail 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo Aq Mt DtxdF@disroot.org
