.\"Copyright (c) 2024, Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo <DtxdF@disroot.org>
.\"All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\"* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
.\"  list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\"* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
.\"  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
.\"  and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"* Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
.\"  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"  this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\"THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\"AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\"DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\"FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\"SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\"CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\"OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\"OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd March 30, 2024
.Dt APPJAIL-DNS 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm appjail-dns
.Nd DNS information for AppJail users
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm appjail-dns
.Op Ar files Ns " " Ns "..."
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility is a command to generate a
.Xr hosts 5 Ns -like
file to be used by scripts and services, such as a DNS server.
.Pp
.Nm
can read one or more
.Xr hosts 5 Ns -like
files by removing any comments. After reading and displaying all the specified
files,
.Nm
will generate a list of DNS hostnames for each jail in each virtual network.
.Pp
The syntax of each line is exactly as specified in
.Xr hosts 5 Ns -like Ns ","
but the jail's hostname follows a particular syntax:
.Do < Ns Sy Jail Name Ns >.< Ns Sy Virtual Network Ns > Ns Sy HOST_DOMAIN Dc
.Ns "."
The virtual network host name syntax is
.Do < Ns Sy Virtual Network Ns > Ns Sy HOST_DOMAIN Dc
.Ns "."
See
.Xr appjail.conf 5
for a description of the
.Sy HOST_DOMAIN
parameter, but as you can see, it is used exactly as is, assuming it is prefixed
with a dot.
.Pp
This document also explains how to use the
.Xr rc 8
script to implement
.Nm
with a DNS server, in this case DNSMasq.
.Pp
The
.Xr rc 8
script checks the current
.Xr hosts 5 Ns -like
.Po Em appjail_dns_hosts Ns : Ns " " Ns /var/tmp/appjail-hosts Pc
file against the output of
.Nm
at intervals
.Po Em appjail_dns_interval Ns : Ns " " Ns 60 Pc
using a checksum; if it detects a change it will write the new content to the
.Xr hosts 5 Ns -like file and execute the hook
.Po Em appjail_dns_hook Ns : Ns " " Ns %%PREFIX%%/share/appjail/scripts/dnsmasq-hook.sh Pc
only if it has the execution bit set.
.Pp
A hook is simply an external program that has two responsibilities: filtering the
.Xr hosts 5 Ns -like
file and restarting the DNS server. These responsibilities depend entirely on the
DNS server, as it may not need to be restarted, or even the hook may not need to
modify the
.Xr hosts 5 Ns -like
file for the DNS server to interpret it correctly.
.Pp
For example, if we use the following file for DNSMasq:
.Pp
.Pa %%PREFIX%%/share/appjail/files/dnsmasq.conf
.Ns :
.Pp
.Bd -literal -compact -offset Ds
addn-hosts=/var/tmp/appjail-hosts
no-resolv
server=208.67.222.222
server=208.67.220.220
.Ed
.Pp
With the necessary parameters in our
.Xr rc.conf 5 ":"
.Pp
.Bd -literal -compact -offset Ds
dnsmasq_enable="YES"
dnsmasq_conf="%%PREFIX%%/share/appjail/files/dnsmasq.conf"
.Ed
.Pp
We are configuring DNSMasq to use
.Pa /var/tmp/appjail-hosts
as our
.Xr hosts 5 "."
Since it can perfectly interpret a
.Xr hosts 5
file, it is not necessary to modify it.
.Pp
The
.Xr hosts 5 Ns -like
file is passed to the hook as the first argument, but we don't need it, since the
only thing our hook needs to do is restart DNSMasq.
.Pp
.Pa %%PREFIX%%/share/appjail/scripts/dnsmasq-hook.sh
.Ns :
.Pp
.Bd -literal -compact -offset Ds
#!/bin/sh

service dnsmasq reload
.Ed
.Pp
AppJail uses the above hook in its
.Xr rc 8
script, but you can change to any other hook by changing the value of the
.Sy appjail_dns_hook
parameter in your
.Xr rc.conf 5 ":"
.Pp
.Bd -literal -compact -offset Ds
appjail_dns_enable="YES"
appjail_dns_hook="%%PREFIX%%/share/appjail/scripts/dnsmasq-hook.sh"
.Ed
.Pp
Once everything is done, we can start the
.Xr rc 8
scripts:
.Pp
.Pp
.Bd -literal -compact -offset Ds
.No # Nm touch Ar /var/tmp/appjail-dns
.No # Nm service Ar dnsmasq Cm start
.No # Nm service Ar appjail-dns Cm start
.Ed
.Pp
Since every time the
.Xr rc 8
script is restarted, it checks if there are any changes between the output of
.Nm
and the current
.Xr hosts 5 Ns -like
file, we should have the file with content, assuming that there are already jails
created and that are in an existing virtual network.
.Pp
.Bd -literal -compact -offset Ds
.No # Nm cat Ar /var/tmp/appjail-dns
10.0.0.1        ajnet.appjail
10.0.0.2        filebrowser filebrowser.ajnet.appjail
10.0.0.3        jtest jtest.ajnet.appjail
.Ed
.Pp
In my case, I have enabled
.Sy SHORTEN_DOMAIN_NAMES ","
so a shorter domain name is available in that file, as you can see.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr appjail-network 1
.Xr hosts 5
.Xr appjail-tutorial 7
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo Aq Mt DtxdF@disroot.org
