.\"Copyright (c) 2024, Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo <DtxdF@disroot.org>
.\"All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\"* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
.\"  list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\"* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
.\"  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
.\"  and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"* Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
.\"  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"  this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\"THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\"AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\"DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\"FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\"SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\"CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\"OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\"OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd March 24, 2024
.Dt APPJAIL-USER 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm appjail-user
.Nd Hints and parameters for trusted users
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Xr appjail 1
is designed to be run by the
.Sy root
user, but this doesn't mean you can't run it as an unprivileged user.
.Xr appjail 1
wraps an external tool to run itself with the appropriate privileges.
.Pp
The idea is to create the illusion that
.Xr appjail 1
runs the same for both an unprivileged user and a privileged user, but in reality
it runs as a privileged user, i.e. the
.Sy root
user. Of course, to create this illusion the external tool must be installed and
configured properly.
.Pp
We recommend
.Em security/doas
because it is lightweight, simple and secure.
.Em security/sudo
has not yet been widely tested, but the same process can be achieved with it.
.Pp
.Ss Trusted User Group
This only makes sense if you want to allow multiple users to run
.Xr appjail 1
as
.Sy root
because you can configure your external tool to have a single user run it.
.Pp
.Bd -literal -compact -offset Ds
.No # Nm pw Cm groupadd Fl n Ar appjail Fl M Ar $USER
.Ed
.Ss External Tool Configuration
.Em security/doas
is used in this example, so
.Xr doas.conf 5
is the file we need to edit, that is, we need to put some options to allow
.Xr appjail 1
and
.Xr appjail-config 1
to run using the group we configured earlier in
.Sx Trusted User Group
or a single user.
.Pp
.Bd -literal -compact -offset Ds
# appjail(1)
permit nopass :appjail as root cmd appjail
# Some applications, specifically x11 applications, require 'keepenv'
# to be set.
#permit nopass keepenv :appjail as root cmd appjail
# appjail-config(1)
permit nopass :appjail as root cmd appjail-config
.Ed
.Ss Unprivileged User
After configuring the external tool as specified in
.Sx External Tool Configuration
we should call
.Sy appjail
and
.Sy appjail-config-user
without problems.
.Pp
In the case of
.Xr appjail-config 1 ","
we must explicitly call it
.Sy appjail-config-user
instead of simply
.Sy appjail-config "."
This is a design decision since the version with the
.Sy -user
suffix introduces a bit of overhead.
.Pp
.Bd -literal -compact -offset Ds
.No $ Nm appjail jail Cm list
STATUS  NAME   TYPE  VERSION       PORTS  NETWORK_IP4
UP      jtest  thin  14.0-RELEASE  -      -
.No $ Nm appjail-config-user Cm set Fl j Ar jtest Ar devfs_ruleset=15
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr appjail 1
.Xr doas 1
.Xr appjail.conf 5
.Xr doas.conf 5
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo Aq Mt DtxdF@disroot.org
.Sh CAVEATS
.Ss Legacy Tool
There is a legacy and deprecated tool on your system called
.Sy appjail-user "."
This is for backward-compatibility and should no be used.
.Ss Filesystem Permissions
Some Makejail's instructions operate with a file and those instructions don't perform
any modification, so if you create a file as an unprivileged user and the Makejail
file calls some instruction such as
.Sy COPY ","
the file is copied as is and this may not make sense for the application running
inside the jail.
.Sh SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
This document assumes that the reader has the appropriate privileges to be
.Sy root ","
so granting unprivileged users to run
.Xr appjail 1
effectively grants those users
the privilege to become
.Sy root "."
If you only want to run certain
.Xr appjail 1
subcommands, configure your external tool to do so.
